PSYQ DOCUMENTATION - BBS/scej_bbs.pdf
================================================================================
Source: /home/deck/MML_Decomp_Project/# Reference Documentation/PSX Development/PSYQ/psx.arthus.net/sdk/Psy-Q/DOCS/BBS/scej_bbs.pdf
Converted: Wed Sep 10 02:47:31 PM CDT 2025
================================================================================

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DEC-LPx466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model NO.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Use of Polygons and Material Editor

I am checking object data, which were prepared for testing, to make
preparations for full-fledged program development. In doing so, I
encountered many problems. So, please give me your kind advice.

1.About Use of Polygons
I am trying to find the most efficient way of using polygons to prepare objects.
I am worried because the front and rear relations of polygons go wrong when
displayed using the Z Sort. I want to put an object of a character on the
ground surface made of polygons. If the ground surface is made from
relatively large polygons, the ground surface, which should be located under
the foot of the character, is seen to the front depending on the view angle.
(The foot are buried under the ground.) Perhaps, this is a phenomenon
which takes place because the front and rear relations of polygons as seen
from the view pint are judged from the center of three vortexes when data
are Z-sorted. The problem may be solved if the ground surface is divided into
smaller polygons, or if the character is floated above the ground. Is not there
any good method to make the character stand aloof on the ground made of
large polygons?

2. About Material Editor
When I try to paste a texture to a polygon using Material Editor, it will not stick
if the texture has the same size as the polygon. I can paste a texture properly
if it is a little larger than a polygon. In my job, I will have to paste many
textures to box-shaped objects so that they may be just fit to the objects. I
request you to supply a function which will allow pasting of a texture to a
polygon of the same size. I pasted a grid texture to a plane consisting of two
triangular polygons, the grid is seen to be distorted depending on the view
angle. I pasted two polygons just from above, selecting them at one time.
It sometimes happens that the diagonal line (which divides the plane into two
triangular polygons) of the plane clearly shows that the texture is a little put
aside. Each time I paste a similar texture to a plural number of planes using
Material Editor, I have to read TIM data into VRAM. For instance, I will have
to read the same TIME data into VRAM six times if I try to paste the same
texture to a plural number of planes. I am much obliged if I have a function
which allows repetitive use of data read into VRAM. When the format of
modeling data is changed from DXF format to RSD format, all the
quadrangular polygons are divided into triangular polygons. Then, I cannot
use quadrangular polygons. Will you please add a function which converts
triangular polygons into quadrangular polygons to the converter, material
editor, or modeler?

Answer to Question 1:
It is difficult to solve this problem because it is intrinsic to Z Sort. As you
pointed out, it is effective to use polygons of the same size, or float the
character above the ground surface. Another method is to perform Z-sorting
of two OTs separately, and combine them into one before drawing.
1          Character          ->      OT1
2          Ground         -> OT2
3        OT2              ->       OT 1    (At this time, designate the Z value of OT
in OT1.)

Thus, you can draw a character after drawing the entire ground surface.

Answer to Question 2:
A: The function which will just fit a texture to an object seems to be very
effective. We will add such a function to a new version.
B: PS-X allows only primary conversion (parallel quadrangle). So, an object
looks distorted when it is seen diagonally with respect to a plane.
C:Like A, we will add this function to a new version.
D: The library of the current version does not support quadrangular
polygons. We will offer a function for conversion into quadrangular polygons
when the library becomes ready for it.

Keywords: Polygon, Z Sort, Material Editor


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS

Subject: About Sprites

Question: To display a sprite, I used the function GsSortSprite, and the
following message was given by the target:
                  "ps_sort_sprite,bg: z resolution overflow"
In which case does this message appear? The contents of the program are
almost similar to the sample program "SPRITE". If I use GsSortFastSprite()
instead of GsSortSprite(), a sprite is displayed properly and no message
appears.

Answer: This error appears if the value of "pri", which indicates the display
preference given as an argument for the GsSortSprite() function, is out of the
allowable OT range. If the value of resolution specified by the "length",
which is a member of the GsOT structure, is designated as "r", "pri" must be
any value between "0" and 2^r-1. No error message is displayed for the
GsSortFastSprite() function to assure high speed. (At this time, it is possible
that memory near OT is destroyed.)

Keywords: Sprite, GsSortSprite(), GsSortFastSprite()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): PAC/AT compatible (DOS6/V)
Hardware tool model No.: NTL-H500/H500C
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560/S510B

Subject: About Quadrangular Polygons

Question 1: It is impossible to display data for quadrangular polygons. Why
are they displayed if each quadrangle is divided into two triangles? If there is
any method which enables quadrangular polygons, please teach it to me.

Question 2: I cannot display polygons for two or more object. Something
seems to be wrong with the data output by RSDLINK. Is it necessary to do
something special?
Question 3:I want to use trigonometric functions. No document describes
them in detail. Please teach me how to use them.

Answer 1: About Quadrangular Polygons You will find a sample in
\PSX\sample\tuto\tut2.c. The essence is condensed in this portion.

draw_poly_F4(0t, x0, x1, x2, x3)
u_long *ot;
SVECTOR *x0, *x1, *x2, *x3 /* Four vertexes of a quadrangle */
{
POLY_F4 WALL;
/* Initialization of primitives */
SetPolyG4(&wall);
/* Setting of brightness value */
SetRGB0(&wall, 0xff, 0xff, 0x00};
/* Designation of coordinates of four points */
setXY4(&wall, x0->vx, x0->vy, x1->vx, x1->vy,
            x2->vx, x2->vy, x3->vx, x3->vy;
/* Saving in OT */
AddPrim(ot, &wall);
/* Drawing */
DrawOTag(ot);

Answer 2: About Polygons in Multiple Objects If you pick multiple files using
rsdlink, you can create a TMD format file containing a plural number of
objects. To produce a plural number of objects in a program, you have to
execute GsSortObject2 for each object. In SPACESHUTTLE, the number of
objects is put in a variable "Objnum". Looping is done as many times as the
number of objects to display multiple objects. You can download the sample
program "SPACESHUTTLE" from BBS.

Answer 3: Reference to Trigonometric Functions
**8.29 Name rcos
Syntax rcos(a)
int a;

Explanation
 To find cos of the angle (4096-2pai) of PSX format in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)
<Format> a: PSX format (4096=2pai radian)

Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value cos(a)


**8.30 Name rsin
Syntax rsin(a)
int a;

Explanation
 To find sin of the angle (4096-2pai) of PSX format in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)
<Format> a: PSX format (4096=2pai radian)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value sin(a)


**8.31 Name ccos
Syntax ccos(a)
int a;

Explanation
To find cos of the angle (4096-2pai) of PSX format in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)

<Format>                  a: PSX format (4096=2pai radian)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value cos(a)


**8.32 Name csin
Syntax csin(a)
int a;

Explanation
To find sin of the angle (4096-2pai) of PSX format in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)

<Format> a: PSX format (4096=2pai radian)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value sin(a)


**8.33 Name cln
Syntax cln(a)
int a;

Explanation
To find cos of the angle (4096-2pai) of PSX format in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)

<Format> a: a:(1, 19, 12)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value ln(a)


**8.34 Name csqrt
Syntax csqrt(a)
int a;

Explanation
To find the square root of the fixed point (4096=1.0) in fixed point notation
(4096=1.0)

<Format> a: (1, 19, 12)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value sqrt(a)
**8.35 Name catan
Syntax catan(a)
int a;

Explanation
To find the main values (-pai/2...pai/2) of arctan of the fixed point (4096=1.0) in
PSX format (4096=2pai)

<Format> a: (1, 19, 12)
Return value: (1, 19, 12)
Return value atan(a)

Keywords: Polygon, quadrangular polygon, rsdlink, multiple objects,
trigonometric functions


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V(DEC 466LPx)

Hardware tool model NO.: DTL-H500
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Functions of PS-X

Questions:
1. I hear it is possible to perform fade-in and fade-out using PS-X in 2D mode
by changing the color of Ambient. However, I failed to do so. Is there any
possible cause? Does use of SetAmibent require setting for the 3D system?

2. Can I use a mosaic function like SFX produced by the company N?

3. I hear there is a library function that allows generation of animation data,
which were prepared using Sprite Editor or 3D modeler, in a program. I do
not know which function I should use. Please teach me.

4.It is very difficult to download using dbugpsx if there are too many tim files. I
request you to allow loading using a batch file. In the previous training
course (April 7 and 8), I heard that there were a function that loaded tim files
in the program. Which function should I use?

5. Will a function that regenerates animation data for Quick Time Movie be
added? Will a similar function for other animation data be provided? Is it the
only method for animation to consecutively regenerate still pictures (one still
picture was pasted to one polygon) as you did in a demonstration in the
previous training course?

6. Is there any problem if the 2D system and 3D system coexist in the same
screen as when a plane sprite for POLY_FT4, BG (with MAP data used), and a
polygon cube coexist in a screen at one time. As for allocation of ot, is there
no problem if SortObject and AddPrim coexists within one routine?

Answers
(1) If you enter:

SPRT P;
SetShadeTex(&p, 0);

 Each pixel inside a polygon is calculated from the pixel value "T" of the
correspondent texture pattern, and luminance "L" as follows:
                 P = (T*L)/128

That is the luminance value of the texture pattern is drawn when L = 128.
Namely,
r0, g0, b0        Texture pattern Actual luminance values
00,00,00aa,bb,cc          00,00,00 (black)
80,80,80aa,bb,cc          aa,bb,cc (Original color)
ff,ff,ff aa,bb,cc         aa*2,bb*2,cc*2 (Luminance is increased by two times.)

(2) A mosaic effect cannot be realized by hitting the register as is done in
SFX. However, it is relatively easy to create a pseudo-mosaic by changing (u,
v) of a primitive.

(3)     See the sample program "\psx\sample\playtod".

(4) As we announced in BBS, you will find a sample program which utilizes
"PCopen" in LIBSN.LIB. Referring to this, please write a program suited to
your purpose.

(5) In PSX, animation is realized using a high speed animation decoder. This
animation decoder does not support the format of Quick Time Movie.
Therefore, there is no such function, which develops and displays data from
Quick Time Movie, in the function group available as standard.
You may use either of the following two methods to display Quick Time Movie
data:
1) To create a function which allows a program to decode Quick Time data
code using the CPU power in the computer
2) To use Quick Time data after converting them to the format of PS-X In
reality, the converter for the method 2) is likely to support this. So, it is
advisable to use it.

(6) There is no problem. We are developing a sample program.

Keywords: Fade-in, fade-out, mosaic, PCopen(), animation, SortObject()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Use of LibGS

Questions: When I asked a question on April 21, I did not know I can use a
question form like this. Very sorry for your trouble. Now, I will ask you a
question using the specified form. LibGS contains two types of similar
functions and structures like GsDOBJ and GsDOBJ2. How should I use them?
 (Apart from the question, I found the following misprinting in a text explaining
GsDOB:
MATRIX lsmatrix --> MATRIX lwmatrix
MATRIX ligthm --> MATRIX lightm

Answers
Thank you for correcting misprinting. There are two major differences
between GsDOBJ and GsDOBJ2: difference in parameter interface, and
whether or not a matrix can be seen by the programmer. In GsDOBJ, the
parameters "rotation", "scale", and "translation", which are called RST type
parameters are given to an object. These parameters are converted into
matrix by LIBGS for calculation. The advantage of this method is that "it can
be known by intuition, and is more easier than to give matrices". There is
drawback that the method is inflexible because the process of conversion
into matrices is not unique. In LIBGS, the order of rotation is only YXZ, but
there exist some other combinations such as xyz and zxy. GSDOBJ2 is
intended for a programmer who wants to manipulate matrices directly.
GSDOBJ2 runs high speed because matrices are directly entered, and it has
no ambiguity mentioned above. However, matrices are used for interface.
So, it has the drawback that it is difficult to know it by intuition. The sample
SPACESHUTTLE uses GsDOBJ2. You can use if for reference.

Keywords: LibGS, GsDOBJ, GsDOBJ


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): PC/AT compatible (PC-DOS
Ver6.1/V)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500/H500CSoftware tool model No.: DTL-
S560/S510B

Subject: About Display of Polygons and Quadrangular Polygons

Questions:
Q1 Sprite data (TIM format) for 8-bit CLUT are not displayed normally. I
cannot display pat8.tim using the sample program. I do not know what to do.
There may be smoothing wrong with compiling or linking on my part. If you
will kindly supply main.cpe and main.sym, I will make researches by myself.

Q2 I cannot display a model using quadrangular polygons in a file of TMD
format. I use the GsSortObject function, referring to the sample program for
scube.


Answers:

Q1 GsSortSprite() is likely to have a bug. A corrected version will be
distributed in May. Please use GsSortFastSprite() for the time being. I
understand you were a little worried about the SCSI I/F board. Is it operating
normally?

Q2 In TMD PRIMITIVE, drawing is executed after processing by
GsSortObj/GssortSprite, etc., which are the functions in libgs, and conversion
into libgpu primitives.

TMD PRIMITIVE -> GsSortObj -> libgpu primitive -> Drawing device
The currently available GsSortObj cannot convert TMD primitives in which
quadrangular polygons coexist. A new function will be added in minor
version upgrading. Please wait for some time.

Keywords: Sprite, polygon, TIM, GsSortObject()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): NWS-3720/DECpc_LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560update2

Subject: About LIBGTE Library

Questions: Concerning the use of flags attached to the Rot type library,
"\DOC\LIBgteABSTRUCT.TXT attached to DTL-S560 update 2 tells me, "For
the meanings and usage of flags, refer to Clipping Guide." In cannot see the
meaning because I can find "Clipping Guide" nowhere. I am preparing a
routine which performs 3D processing using RotTranPers. Unless I have a
system that checks points out of the view area before transparent
conversion and reports such points as requiring clipping, I cannot construct a
normal screen. Currently, I am performing rotation conversion using RotTrans
for a substitute.

Answers: Information on whether or not vertexes have exceeded a certain
area containing the view area is returned to the flag. This enables deletion
on a polygon basis, but it does not allow precise clipping to enable drawing of
a polygon display area only. We are currently developing a library and
clipping guide for precise clipping. Please wait for some time. The meanings
of flag bits that can be used for coarse clipping are as follows:
MSB                                                    LSB
31-----------17---14-13-------0
Y-coordinate after transparent conversion has exceeded --2^10,2^10).
X-coordinate after transparent conversion has exceeded --2^10,2^10).
Z coordinate after transparent conversion has become small than h/2.
Where, h is the distance from the view point to the screen.

Keywords: LibGTE, RotTranPers()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): IBM PS/V2410 NWC
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Number of Colors in 15-Bit BG Display

Questions: When I load 15-bit TIM data to VRAM, and display them as BG, the
number of colors seems to be reduced. BG looks as if 8-bit RGN were
displayed as 3-bit, 3-bit, 2bit. Is this ascribable to the specification, or is it a
problem that can be solved by updating of the library?

Answers: In the current target, R, G, B are reduced to 3 bits, 3 bits, 2 bits.
Only when the ambient color is designated as 0x80, 0x80, 0x80, the data are
displayed in 16 bits. This problem will be solved in updating of the 7/M
hardware.
Keywords: TIM, 15 bits, BG


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): IBM PS/V410 NWC
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-h500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Detailed Specification of Sound Data

Questions: Please explain the specification of sound data sampling rate and
number of quantization bits handled by PS-X. According to the document,
the sampling rate is 4-bit ADPCM. Is it variable?

I hear the an AIFF converter is attached to Sound Tool. To what degree, is
the AIFF specification, including loop setting for individual tones, supported?

I hear that ATRAC compression for MD is used. If 44.1KHz linear 16-bit for CD
is compressed to about 1/5, the length of about 0.5 second can be assigned to
one tone if it is loaded to 2Mbyte main memory to make the best use of the
specification which assures 256 tones per file. Even if loops are successfully
built into each tone, it will be difficult to create a decent music piece. It is a
great pity because sound quality is fairy high because it is MD level. If main
memory has only 2 M-bytes, is it not possible to enable selection of 22KHz and
11Khz as sampling rate, and reduce the number of bits?

Answers: (Please explain the specification of sound data sampling rate and
number of quantization bits handled by PS-X.)
In PS-X, 16-bit sound data with the sampling rate of 44.1kHz are compressed
to 4-bit ADPCM are stored in local memory. Regeneration is performed as 4-
bit ADPCM is expanded to 16-bit data real time. Twenty-four tones can be
regenerated at one time, and pitch conversion (pitch change) and envelope
modification of each waveform can be performed freely.

(According to the document, the sampling rate is 4-bit ADPCM. Is it variable?)
Using the function of pitch conversion, sound sampled at any other frequency
(5, 11, 22, 32, 48kHz, etc.) than 44.1kHz can be reproduced for the original
pitches. (Naturally, sound sampled at 22kHz is reproduced at 44.1kHz, the
sound quality ill be 22kHz.)

(I hear the an AIFF converter is attached to Sound Tool. To what degree, is
the AIFF specification, including loop setting for individual tones, supported?)
It supports the setting of loops utilizing sampling frequency and marker.
Fundamentally, wave editing is performed using any existing tool (Sound
Designer II, Alchemy, etc.), you will have to convert the results edited using
the sampling tool.

 (I hear that ATRAC compression......and reduce the number of bits?)
We do not have a plan to employ ATRAC compression for PS-X. As mentioned
above, it is possible to change the sampling rate. You can save the memory
area by changing the rate depending on the sound to be sampled. However,
the memory area cannot be saved by 8-bit data sampling (in which data are
handled as 16-bit data) because the number of bits is fixed at 16 bits (4 bits
after conversion) because of the restrictions ADPCM has. Surely, 512kB
(equivalent to 16bit approximately 1.8 M-bytes) of data may need only 20
seconds even in monaural. Considering the fact that the waveform memory
size for the commonly used MIDI sound source is several M-bytes, a fairly rich
sound source can be constructed compared with the existing game software.

Keywords: Sound data, sampling, ADPCM


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Clipping

Questions: I want some explanation about NearClip. When I set relations of
the view point, I determine the view point position first, then determines the
distance to the screen, and the position of NearClip. I think it is meaningless
unless the position of NearClip is farther than the position of the screen. The
sample program for SPACESHUTTLE designates:
Position of view point              -2000
Position of screen                  1000 from view point
NearClip                            100 from view point

I understand that NearClip cuts things in front of the screen. Am I wrong?
When I try to display a large polygon, it is clipped for items other than Near
and Far. It seems to me that the top, bottom, right, and left are clipped. Can I
see on which position clipping is done?

Answers: In three dimensions, the screen is placed at a relatively remote
place. If all the things existing at the front of the screen are cut, most of the
things at a short distance are cut. Near Clip is set in terms of the distance
from the view point, and it is not a distance from the screen. Generally, a
value equivalent to one half of the projection is set. If the X and Y coordinates
of, at least, one of the vertexes of a polygons goes out of the range between -
1024 and 1024 on the screen coordinate system, the polygon will be clipped.

Keywords: Clipping, NearClip


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): IBM PS/V2420 NWC
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Sound Functions

Questions: Thank you very much for your answers. I read the document
concerning the VAB data format and SEQ, and there arose the following
questions. Please answer them.
1. I understand that VAB data allows multi-sampling. Does it mean that
splitting of 16 VAG data per program is done using min and max (minimum and
maximum note limits) on the VAG Attribute Table to realize a drum set?Then,
what meaning does Bank Change in program change and control change in
SEQ have? What in VAG data is changed by these MIDI status data?

2 The VAB data format does not include any item used to set a MIDI channel.
Are sixteen programs are correspondent to sixteen channels of MIDI?
3. I understand that SEQ supports resolution of SMF. Is there no limit? If
resolution is increased, is not the performance of the entire machine
adversely affected by frequent interruption?

Answers:

1. Multi-sampling becomes possible upon setting of note limits as you say.
Program change in SMF means which program should be assigned to a
logical track in MIDI. In a sound system, the program is switched over as it is.
Bank change in control change switches the bank (VAB). The PS-X sound
system allows simultaneous use of multiple banks (VAB). Definition (open) of
multiple banks before playing a musical piece will enable simultaneous use.

2.VAB is a sound set having attributes. It is possible to utilize the same bank
(VAB) from multiple SEQs (sequences). So, MIDI channels should be set in
SMF (SEQ). The channels 1 through 16 of MIDI are set to VAB 0 through 15 by
default. However, it is recommended to set them explicitly using program
change at the start of SMF.

3. It is possible to operate the S-X sound system in cycles of 1/60 second and
1/240 cycle. This allows switching of the sound system upon starting. For
instance, even if data with the resolution of 480 are created using Performer,
it must be quantized to 1/240 seconds on replying. So, this does not affect the
performance of the entire machine.

Keywords: Sound, VAB, SEQ


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DECpc LPx 486d2 (DOS)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510

Subject: About Order of Drawing of Ordering Tables Using LIBGS

Questions: I have a question about the order of drawing of ordering tables
(OTs) on the LIBS library for the PSX system. The manual for the LIBGPU
library describes that OTs are drawn in the due order starting with the index
No. 0. However, GsDraw0t() in LIBGS draws the index No. 0 lastly. I can find
no comments on this anywhere. Is it due to the specification? Considering
the imaginary Z value transferred to a GsSort function, the order of drawing
is not likely to be changed in future. Please make correct information open to
the public.

Answers:
0 index start             0 index end
LIBGS                     LIBGPU

As seen from the above table, LIBGS does not support OT in the 0 index start.
If OT is to be used by LIBGS and LIGPU in common, OT must be initialized
using the reverse direction OT described on page 53 of Library Reference
Manual VOL 1.

Keywords: LIBGS, ordering table
Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Abnormal Operation of Program

Questions: If the program described below is executed, linking with the
target box is restored even if I do nothing. If I run another program after that,
a bus error occurs whenever PadInit(0); is encountered. (An example is Sprite
provided in a sample.) The following program was originally much longer. In
this program, a bus error occurred when PadInit(): was encountered. I
suspected the coding, and made the program short. I made researches, but
operation went wrong. Will you please teach me a cause?

Answers: If PadInit() was executed, it is necessary to execute PadStop();
before terminating the program. Enter "PadStop()" before "exit(0);". The
following is the sample of change:***


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): IBM PS/V2410 NWC
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Animation Replay Time in PS-X

Questions: When I asked you questions about the specification of animation
in PS-X, your answer was as follows: CD-ROM can read data at a speed of
300 kB/sec. Therefore, the data size per frame is:
10kB/frame in replay at 30 frames per second
 20kB/frame in replay at 16 frames per second

If data are compressed to 150 kB/sec., sacrificing the picture quality, I
suppose that reading from the double-speed CD-ROM drive will be
complicated.To what degree, can the CD-ROM drive in PS-X follow up with low
speed reading? A software program we are currently developing will use
many animations.Therefore, the short replay time will be fatal to animations
at 300Kb/sec. If I give preference to replay time rather than picture quality,
will you please teach me how long replay can be performed?

Answers: The PS-X CDROM data can select either of the following two
transfer speeds:
Mode                     Transfer speed             Total replay time
Fixed speed              150 kB/sec.                         74 sec.
Double speed             300 kB/sec.                         37 sec.
In fixed speed mode, data can be read at a speed of 150 kB/sec.Therefore,
data size per frame is:

5 kB/frame when animation is replayed at 30 frames per second
10 kB/frame when animation is replayed at 16 fames per second

Keywords: CD-ROM, animation replay


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-J500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560
Subject: Display of Inverted Sprites

Questions: Using the function of LIBGPU level, I want to display sprites
inverted in the horizontal and vertical directions, but I cannot to so using
primitive SPRT. If I use POLY_FT4, I can do so. However, it requires too
great overhead in designation of parameters and execution.I think it will be
hardly possible to store inverted data in memory because of the limited
memory size. It will be easy to display inverted sprites at a high speed
considering the function of PS-X. What should I do?

Answers: To our regret, only POLY_FT4 allows vertical and horizontal
inversion of sprites. Even if GPU is equipped with such a function, it will be
meaningless because execution time will be doubled due to the architecture
of GPU. To conclude, GPU has no command packet which designates
horizontal inversion. It is unavoidable that overhead will be great. If possible
you may consider storing of inverted data in the texture area. We think
there is a sufficient area in comparison with the conventional products.

Keywords: Sprite, inverted display, libGPU


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Matrix Operation

Questions: If the following is designated to RotMatrix in the gte library:

SVECTOR R ;
MATRIX M ;
InitGeom () ;
...
r.vx = v.vy = r.vz = 0
RotMatrix (&r, &m) ;

Then, the following is returned as elements of m"
[4094][0][0]
[0][4094][0]
[0][0][4094]
Should not this be corrected as follows?
[4096][0][0]
[0][4096][0]
[0][0][4096]

 If "4094" is correct, why? GsWSMATRIX, which seems to be a conversion
MATRIX from WORLD to SCREEN, also contains 4094. An error with respect
to the value designated by RVIEW is found in "trans".

Answers: Because PSX is a machine with the finite word length, all the
numerical functions have errors. RotMatrix has error in all the angles. 0
degree and 90 degrees are not exceptions. It seems to me that what you are
emphasizing is "There is an error in 0 degree, which should has no fractions,
and you cannot stand it." We treat all the angles evenly. So, 0 degree also
includes an error to the same degree. I will explain the process which
produces errors. However, it is not the sole cause for errors. The
fundamental reason for error lies in finite world length. RotMatrix is
calculated using sin and cos functions. The sin cos functions for PSX are
calculated from the sin table for a range between 0 degree and a value (1023)
immediately before 90 degrees. To find sin and cos functions for any angle
out of the range between 0 degree and 90 degrees, a complementary angle,
supplementary angle, etc. are used as in: sin (just 90 degrees) = sin (a value
immediately before 90 degrees) That is, sin(1024) = sin (1023) = 4095.
Similarly, cos has an error. When calculations are made from the finite table,
an error is produced like other angles unless special processing is performed
for the connection. PSX does not perform special processing for the
following reasons:
1)Any angle has an error because fixed point notation is used. (It is
unnecessary that errors for only 0 degree and 90 degrees are zero.)
2)Special processing for 0 degree and 90 degrees will impair the entire
continuity.
3) Processing speed will be reduced. The best way will be to perform
programming in such a manner that the program may not be affected by
errors.

Keywords: Matrix operation, lIBGTE, RotMatrix()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): NEWS, DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Function VectorNormal and OuterProduct12

Questions: I used Vector NOrmal and OuterProduct12 provided as library
functions for libgte. Depending on values set as arguments, correct values
fail to be returned. (Zero vector or folded values are returned.) Mostly, this
occurs when the values of vector components are remote from 0. The
following is an example:
v0.vy = 0x0000;
v0.vz = 0x0000;

VectorNormal(&v0, &v1);

If v0.vx is changed, the following values are returned:

v0.vx = 0xb000 ----> v1.vx = 0x0ffe (Almost normal up to this point)
v0.vx = 0xc000 ----> v1.vx = 0x1ad4
v0.vx = 0xd000 ----> v1.vx = 0x214c
v0.vx = 0xe000 ----> v1.vx = 0x0000
v0.vx = 0xf000 ----> v1.vx =0x3dd8

There seems to be a bug because the arguments are of VECTOR type. If this
is due to the specification, please let me know the range of values that can be
entered as arguments. I an performing similar processing. It will be helpful
if you kindly let me know functions which can cause a similar phenomenon.

Answers: Very sorry. It is ascribable to the incomplete document.
VectorNormal calculates the sum of the squares of individual components,
and divides each component by the square root. When calculating the sum of
the squares, overflow can be caused in signed 32-bit integer operation.
Therefore, the range of allowable arguments should be as follows:

"Sum of squares of individual components should not exceed 2**31-1."

In a strict sense of the word, it is difficult to check such values. You are
requested to divide by a constant if vectors are likely to be large. ARguments
in OuterProduct12 are of VECTOR type, but calculations are performed in 16
bits. Therefore, the range of arguments is:

"-2**15 to 2**15-1"
The same applies to OuterPoduct0.

Keywords: VectorNormal(), OuterProduct12()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500SoftWare tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Errors in Matrix Operation

Questions: From the document I received from you, I understand why errors
are caused even for definite values such as 0 and 4096. The following
questions may be related to the above fact. If the view point is extremely
brought near to an object, the latter looks as it were moved away temporarily.
(It swells and shrinks.) It is imagined that this is due to the result of
accumulation of errors in matrix operation, and I understand it cannot be
helped. Is not it possible to reduce errors to a certain degree by improving
the precision of the sin table? I think the table "rsin_tbl" is this sin table.
Seemingly, the high order two bytes are not used (filled with zeroes). If 12-bit
shift is not always necessary for the operation part before transfer to GTE, is
not it possible to improve the precision of operation without reducing the
processing speed by improving the precision of this table and using the
library functions based on it? rsin_tbl seems to concern data for the range
between sin 0 to sin of a value immediately before 90. According to your
answer, PSX does not perform special processing for the following reasons:

1) Any angle has an error because fixed point notation is used. (It is
unnecessary that errors for only 0 degree and 90 degrees are zero.)
2) Special processing for 0 degree and 90 degrees will impair the entire
continuity.
3) Processing speed will be reduced.

If emphasis is placed on 3), is not it all right to have the table contain data for
a range between 0 degree and a value immediately before 180 degrees, and
increase the table size to 2 K-bytes? Thus, one condition will be eliminated in
search of appropriate data, and continuity will be secured for the range
between 0 degree and a value immediately before 180 degrees. From a
viewpoint of the user, it is not desirable because the memory area used by
OS will be increased. However, I am expecting that the user will be able to
select a library in future to give preference to speed or capacity. To be brief,
the problem lies in that an object looks as if it were swollen and shrunk. What
should be born in mind to "perform programming in such a manner that the
program may not be affected by errors"? I am very much obliged if you kindly
show an example.

Answers: The sin bit table uses 16 bits only. If its precision were improved,
the precision would be kept high up to the middle point of RotMatrix
operation. In a matrix output from RotMatrix, the digits that follow the decimal
point are 12 bits. So, all that we could do would be to eliminate the error for
the last bit. Swelling and shrinkage would not be corrected even if the
precision were improved. The cause for swelling is unknown, but a cause may
lie in another function even if it is ascribable to the library. RotMatrix, rsin,
and rcos are included with libgte, but they do not use GTE. Therefore, the
user can generate a function of the same level. For your reference, we are
attaching the source for RotMatrix, sin, and cos. Please perform coding if you
are going to place emphasis on computation speed. You should bear in mind
the following: "A unit matrix is not a unit matrix."
If you want to know whether two vectors are of one-dimension
independence, it is not always substantially independent if the small matrix
expression is near 0.

Keywords: Matrix operation


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS (QuarterL)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: Arguments Having Variable Length and Functions

Question: What should I do to write a function whose array of arguments has
a variable length, such as printf()? I cannot reference va_start() or va_end()
because stdarg.h is not included with the standard library.

Answers: Fundamentally, the method will be to have the first argument bring
the number of arrays, and loops will be used to get the arguments. Which
address an argument is stored can be known from the result of de-assembly.
GNU does this seriously and cleanly. So, there seems to be no problem. If you
are pressed in time, you may study the applicable portions of the source code
of freeware BSD to get knowledge.

Keywords: Function, arguments with variable length


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Heap

Questions:1. The description of InitHeap() tells that the start of heap can be
designated using "head". The description of malloc() tells that heap memory
is set to the highest position + 4 in the module. Does this mean that a heap
can be set by myself if InitHeap() is used, and heap memory is set to the
highest position + 4 in the module by default?

What is the default for SetGraphDebug()? I do not call it because I presume
that the default is 0.

This is not a question, but a report on a bug. If a DXF file contains Japanese
code in DXF2RSD, no conversion is performed because the file is construed
as binary. When I use Strata Vision, Japanese code is often put into a file. I
will be glad if you will make corrections in release of a new version.

Answers:

(1) About Heap Memory

InitHeap() is a function which initializes internal data structure used by
malloc(). Therefore, the start of the heap area and its size must be specified
before execution. The current version performs automatic execution so that
the highest address of the module to the end of the 8Mbyte main memory may
be designated as heap although this is not described in the document. There
is a possibility that it will be overlaid on a stack, but it was selected as the
maximum setting. To override this setting, execute InitHeap(), and define the
heap area by yourself.

(2)About SetGraphDebug()       The default setting is 0.

Keywords: Heap, InitHeap(), malloc(), SetGraphDebug()


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200Software tool model NO.: DTL-S

Subject: About Texture

Questions: I want to put textures in VRAM. I cannot put them in a rectangular
area (640, 0) - (1023, 511). For instance, I want place a texture in an area (640,
0) - (1023, 1023). Can I paste a texture greater than 256x256?

Answers: The frame buffer controlled and referenced by GPU is a
rectangular area (0, 0) - (1023 511). Therefore, the coordinates (640, 512) -
(1023, 1023) do not exist on the frame buffer. Therefore, you cannot specify
nothing there. (See page 40 of Reference Manual.) You cannot paste a
texture greater than 256x256 because two or more texture pages cannot
designated. Not only the area (640, 0) - (1023, 511), but a larger area can be
secured if the display area s made smaller. We conjecture that you are using
a display/drawing area having the size of 640x640. If so, textures and CLUTs
can be put on the area (0, 480) - (639, 511). Thus, you can put 80 16-bit sprites
having the size of 16x16, or 320 4-bit sprites of the same size.

Keywords: Texture, VRAM


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About RotAverageNclip4

Questions: I used RotAverageNclip4, but otz does not return a correct value.
"0" is always returned. Please teach me if a correct value is returned, or it is
impossible to return a correct value under the circumstances. Recently, it
often occurs to me that I am using precious time finding whether a queer
phenomenon which takes place is due to a bug created by myself or
ascribable to the library. I will be able to save much time if you reveal us
bugs, and things which cannot be done although they are described in the
manual. (WE have a place for BUG information in BBS.)

Answers: The function of Rot...Nclip type has arguments as in:
       opz=Rot...Nclp(....p,otz,flag)

Due to a bug, the following is used for RotAverageNclip4:

opz=RotAverageNclip4(v0,v1,v2,v3,sxy0,sxy2,sxy2,xsy3,p,dummy,otz,flag)

Please use it as described above.

Keywords: RotAverageNclip4


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S510

Subject: About Display in Interlace Mode

Questions: Concerning the luster output in 640x640 interlace mode, the odd
and even numbers are switched by turns in an interval of 1/60 second. Is it
possible to control this from a program. If processing is not finished within
1/60 second, the screen display will flicker. I want to avoid this.

Answers: You cannot control it, or rather, the specification of the NTSC
signals does not allow it. If you want prevent the screen display from
flickering, you may use 640x240 double buffers in interlace mode.

Keywords: Interlace mode


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model NO.: DTL-S510

Subject: About Root Counter Control Service and Event Control Service

Questions: Can I use root counter control service and event control service in
the kernel library (libapi)? I made a try, and found that the value of the root
counter was always 0, and that a program, which was developed referring to
"Hints on Programming Using Vertical Return Line Triggering" described on
page 18 of Library Reference Version 1.0 Vol. 1, stops at WaitEvent().

Answers: As for vertical return lines, the target value is fixed at 1. Because
the root counter takes on a value between 0 and target value minus 1, it is a
normal behavior that the root counter takes on 0. In connection with stopping
of your sample program, we prepared the following code, and it proved to run
normally:       ***

Keywords: LibAPI, root counter control, event control


Host machine for development (maker/model No.): GATEWAY2000/P5-60
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: Questions about Movie

Questions:
1. Is it possible to select resolution? If so, what kinds of resolution can be
selected?
2. Is it possible to select the number of colors? If so, how many kinds can I
select?
3. What is the number of frames in a second?
4. Is it possible to perform image compression? If so, what method should I
use? To what degree is picture quality deteriorated by compression. Is a tool
for compression available?
5. When will the movie tool be released?
6. When will the library be supplied?

Answers:
1. A decoded picture is expressed by a set of 16x16 rectangular areas
instead of a large board. Combination of such areas assures expression of
any shape.
2. You can select the number of colors from 24-bit RGB/16-bit RGB during
decoding.
3. The de-freezing rate is 9000 MB/sec. (MB = Macro Block = 16x16 sprite).
Therefore, you can select, for instance, the following:
320x240 (= 300 MB) x 30 frames/sec.
640x240 (= 600 MB) x 15 frames/sec.

4.5.6   All of them will be distributed soon. (6/M: PC version)

Keywords: Movie


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S510

Subject: About Error in qsort()?

Questions: I made questions about qsort the other day. Thank you for your
answers. I verified what you answered. I made tries thereafter. If found an
abnormal result is produced if qsort() is executed after dynamically securing a
memory area using malloc(). If USE_HEAP is not commented out, the
following will result.
Initial table:
value: 25, ID: 0
value: 33, ID: 1
value: 27, ID: 1
Final table:
value: -2, ID: 8
value: 25, ID: 0
value: 27, ID: 2
I heard that setting for heap was needed, but it was out of my mind. The
cause for the abnormal result may not lie in qsort(). If you find something,
please tell me.

Answers: The currently available qsort() requires "the number of elements of
the sorted item - 1" as the second argument. Correctly, it should read as "the
number of elements of the sorted item". Correction will be made when the
PC/AT board is released around the end of July.

Keywords: qsort


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H ____Software tool model No.: DTL-S ____

Subject: Movement of Rotation Axes by Rot-Related Functions

Question: Problems arose when I was using Rot-related functions, such as
RotTransPers and RotAverage4 in libgte. I will explain them using the sample
tuto2 ("rotation" and "scale" using the libgte functions). Using this sample, a
smooth-gradation polygon displayed on the screen can be rotated and
enlarged. If I follow these steps:
(1) To perform Y-axis rotation using the G, and P buttons
(2) To perform X-axis rotation using the E and F buttons.
In the above procedure, the "X-axis" is not affected at all even when Y-axis
rotation is performed in (1). Normal X-axis rotation is accomplished by (2). If I
follow these steps:
(1) To perform X-axis rotation using the E and F buttons
(2) To perform Y-axis rotation using the G and P buttons

n the above procedure, If I perform X-axis rotation in (1), the "Y-axis" also
performs X-axis rotation, and normal Y-axis rotation fails in (2). Why does this
occur? Further researches seem that there is axis destroying relations like
"X-axis > Y-Axis > Z-axis". That is, - If X-axis rotation is performed, the Y- and
X- axes rotate - If Y-axis rotation is performed, the Z-axis rotates but X-axis
does not move. - Even if Z-axis rotation is performed, neither X- nor Y-axis
rotates. I think that a rotation matrix varies according to the order of rotation
of X-, Y-, and Z-axes.
Is the problem ascribable to this? If so, please teach me a method for
normal axis rotation. I also ask you to let me know the order of rotation
actually employed.

Answers: The rotation matrix generating function RotMatrix in libgte
calculates a rotation matrix in the order of:
[X-axis rotation matrix]*[Y-axis rotation matrix]*[Z-axis rotation matrix]

If this result is set in GTE and a Rot-related function is executed, the entered
coordinate vectors are applied beginning with the right.
[X-axis rotation matrix]*[Y-axis rotation matrix]*[Z-axis rotation
matrix]*[Coordinates]
Therefore, the order for RotMatrix is Z, X, and Y from the right. X-axis rotation
is not affected by any other rotation because X-axis rotation is performed
lastly. However, Y and Z are affected by others. Does "normal rotation" mean
that an object rotates around the rotation axes fixed to the screen coordinate
system? As far as you employ a method in which the posture of an object
(local coordinate system) is held by the rotation angle and rotation is
accomplished by the change of the rotation angle, you have to use the
rotation matrix mentioned above. Whatever order may be employed, two
rotation axes are always affected by the other rotation axis. If the posture of
an object is held by the rotation matrix itself, and rotation is accomplished by
applying a rotation matrix correspondent to each axis, the object can be
rotated around a rotation axis fixed to the screen coordinate system.
However, errors will be accumulated in the rotation matrix in an moment, and
it will not be a "rotation matrix" any more. Therefore, "normal rotation" is
impossible.

Keywords: RotTransPers, RotAverage


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560S

Subject: About Screen Mode

Questions: I have a question about screen mode for PlayStation. If I set
screen mode for PlaySation as follows:
Setting of DispEnv:      512*240 dots
Setting of DrawEnv:      320*240 dots

Dust is displayed outside because only 320 dots are drawn. Can I use a
method which masks the range outside 320 dots? We are transplanting a
function for vertical scroll shooting. So, we want to employ the above
settings as a means of reproducing vertically long screen. I understand that
such use requires a special technique. However, it greatly concerns the
appearance of a game. Please study this problem, and answer my question.

Answers: Sorry for waiting so long. Two methods are conceivable. In the
following examples, 128x128 is displayed on a 320x240 screen. These
methods have advantages and drawbacks.
1) In the next library, a window can be put within the display area, and limit it
to a rectangular area.
320                Black           128

240              Display            128

In this case, the drawing buffer may cover the 128x128 area. However, the
non-display portion is displayed in black.
2) You should secure a drawing buffer for 320x240, but the drawing area is
limited so that it may be put within 128x128 in actual drawing. The remaining
area must be cleared first, or a certain image pattern must be loaded there.
At this time, the two buffers must be loaded with the same pattern. In this
case, the drawing buffer must have an area for 320x240. However, it is
possible to apply a color or paste a still image to the area outside the window.
Keywords: Screen mode, DispEnv, DrawEnv


Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DOS/V (with AIR 486MI
Mother Board used)

Subject: (1) About Stack (2) About LIBGTE (3) About Polygons withTextures
Questions:

(1) About Stack
I think the following question concerns the specification of the compiler.
Please teach me for which parts the stack is used, and what size does it have.
If you have any document which shows this, please tell me the name of the
document. I think that the stack is set using SYSTEM.CNF upon booting. How
should I set it currently? Is it possible to set the stack from an application?

(2) About LIBGTE
May I understand as follows? Of the functions in LIBGTE, only RotTrans uses
hardware actually. Others are functions related to coordinate change. All
the other calculations are performed by software. I want to know the clear
borderline between the parts calculated by hardware and by software.

(3) About Texture with Polygons
When pasting a small texture to a large polygon, it is conceivable to paste two
or more textures to the polygon instead of pasting an enlarged texture. Can I
do this (without dividing the polygon)?

Answers:
(1) A stack pointer can be set by designating SetSp in a program as
described in the manual. The size will be extended upward until it comes to a
stop. Normally, a stack pointer is set at the end of main memory. Currently,
RUN.EXE sees the contents of DIP switches, and assigns a stack pointer to
the end of main memory.

(2) Most of the functions included in libgte use hardware "GTE coprocessor".
Exceptions are as follows: rsin, rcos, csin, ccos, cln, csqrt, catan, RotMatrix,
RotMatrixC, TransMatrix, ScaleMatrix, Subpol4, Subpol3

(3) Possible if textures of the same patterns are used. This is designated by
cutting the texture window. Setting for the texture window is done using
PutDrawEnv() or DR_MODE primitive. If the texture window is designated as
(0, 0) - (16, 16), mapping is done as if the (0, 0) - (16, 16) portion (portion T) is
repeated.

Keywords: Stack, LibGTE, texture


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V(DEC 466LPx)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-h500Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Functions of PS-X

Questions:    Please answer the following questions:
1. About libgs
In libgpu, it is possible to draw in an area other than the double buffers if a
drawing area is changed using PutDrawEnv. What should I do to draw in an
area other than the double buffers using libgs? (I want to draw BG using
primitives and maps defined using DOBJ.)
2. I calculated the counts from VSync to next VSync using a function related to
Vcount. The counts were about 250 counts. I executed SortBG for 320x240
BG using 8x8 cells for 4bitCLUT, the execution of this function (SortBG)
needed 128 counts. That means that two BGs of this size are output within
1/60, it will fall out of processing. Similarly, 16x16 cells required about 55
counts. From the results of above experiments, processing cannot be
performed if two BGs for 8x8 cells and five BGs for 16x16 cells are rewritten
using PSX. I do not think the drawing ability of PSX is so poor. I would like to
confirm the correctness of ths results by performing approximate
collocations. P lease provide me with data, if any, on how many PGs can be
rewritten in 1/60 second for 8bitCLUT and 16bitDIRECT. (Does it change with
the size of cells?) May I understand that BG is a congregation of POLY_FT4
in libpu? If so, BG (11CEL=8X8, 320X240) will cover 32 x 30 = 960 polygons, and
it seems to me that about 2000 polygons per two BGs are likely to match
considering the performance. I am sorry that my comments are too lengthy.
To be brief, I want to know whether the above is correct or not.

  * I have not received answers to my questions on May 24 and 25. Please
take the trouble to answer my questions soon.

Answers:

1. Define using GsDefDispBuff(), draw, and restore.

2. To fill 320x240 with BG using 4bitCLUT, we made changes to the following
sample which was used in the previous seminar:
\psx\sample\graphics\intro\tuto3.c The results were four BGs for 8x8 cells, and
about 6 BGs for 16x16 cells. As the cell size is reduced, a greater load is
applied to processing because a larger primitive list is needed. Speed for
textures is higher in the order of 4-bit>8-bit>16-bit. The approximate speed
ratio is as follows:
          4-bit:8-bit:16-bit = 1:1.5:2

Keywords: BG, LibGS


Host machine for development (maker/model No.): Apple/Centronics 650
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H700Software tool model No.: DTL-S710

Subject: About Processing around SPU

Questions:
(1) About Interrupt and Effective Value of Timing in Performance of SEQ Data
Currently, I understand that interrupts for data interpretation at timing of 1/60
or 1/240 occur. Is processing for "data analysis/sound production" performed
at this interruption timing? If these interrupts are used for sound production,
sound can only be produced by adjustment at 1/60 (240), and the specification
will fail to follow up with the resolution and tempo which are the bases for
timing of sound production. If you advise me not to mind it. I judge that the
sound production timer is controlled inside SPU. Is it possible to make
resolution and tempo effective freely?

(2) About Data Structure for SEQ
Currently, I am preparing data using DTL-H700 and DTL-S710. A fault in tempo
occurs very frequently. (It is not a fault due to inhibition of interrupts or hook,
which is dependent on Macintosh.) I do not perform execution on a
development target. I cannot trace the reason because data attached as a
sample does not include a fault. I think a solution can be given by referring to
information utilized for .SEQ. If possible, will you reveal the head information
for the first 8 bits in .SEQ data? Please give advice if you happen to know a
possible cause that brings about tempo instability.

Answers:
(1) As you conjectured, data analysis and sound production are performed at
timing of 1/60 or 1/240. As you know, resolution can be increased to 1/480 for
the existing sequencer, but such design has been employed considering that
control at 1/60 or 1/240 seemed to be sufficient for PlayStation. More precise
interruption control is possible, but the figure 1/60 or 1/240 seems to be
appropriate when the balance with graphic processing is considered. The
sound production timer is not controlled inside SPU but by CPU (R3000).
Waveform processing (DSP functions such as ADSR and reverberation) is
performed by SPU only.

(2) The current Sound Artist board driver for Macintosh has trouble in time
control, and tempo is instable because of the swaying of interrupts in 1/60
second. SEQ data are preserved using resolution designated by the
sequencer. So, there is no problem in replay using a target or machine.
Currently, improvements are being made to enable a driver on Macintosh to
perform correct replay. Please wait for some time. We registered a bank
editor and converter, from which minor bugs have been eliminated, in BBS.
Please try it. (In this version, no correction is made to the variation of tempo.)

Keywords: SPU, Sound Artist Tool


Host machine for development (DOS/V): DECpc XL 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-D5?0

Subject: About Change of Direction of Light Source

Questions: I am creating a polygon display system using LibGte. I do not
know how to change the direction vectors for three light sources which are
set using SetColorMatrix. If I execute RotMatrix, and SetLightMatrix, the
directions of all the three light sources are changed. Please tell me how to
control individual light sources.
Answers: SetColorMatrix determines colors of light sources. RotMatrix
determines the rotation matrix from the rotation angle. Let us designate the
colors of the three light sources as follows:
(LR1, LG1, LB1)                      (4096 = full color)
(LR2, LG2, LB2)
(LR3, LR3, LR3)

Let us designate the direction vectors for the light sources as follows:
(L11, L12, L13)
(L21, L22, L23)
(L31, L32, L33)

For simplicity, let us suppose that all the polygons are fixed to the world
coordinate system. If you do not want to change the directions of the light
sources, enter the following. Then, the colors and directions of the light
sources are set.

MATRIX LC;
MATRIX LL;

If you want to change the directions of the three light sources in the
similar manner, enter as follows:

MATRIX m;
SVECTOR ang;
RotMatrix(&and,&m);
MulMatrix2(&m,&11);
SetLightMatrix(&ll);

If you want to change the direction of only one light source, enter:

MATRIXm;

If polygons are located on the local coordinate system, multiply ll matrices
described above by the local/world conversion matrix, and execute
SetLightMatrix.

MulMatrix0(&ll,&lw,&ll_new);
SetLightMatrix(&ll_new);

Be careful because ApplyMatrix and MulMatrix destroy the constant rotation
matrix in GTE.

Keywords: Light source, LibGTE, SetColorMatrix, RotMatrix, SetLightMatrix


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS (QuarterL)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S590

Subject: movie

Questions:    I have some questions and requests about Movie newly added
to S-590.

1) Will you please distribute a program which reproduces streaming data,
which are output from the movie generating tool Movconv, on the target box?
I did not find any in CD-ROM. Referring to the sample program, I have created
a program which reads all the streaming data on DOS, and transfers a bit
stream for each frame to the decode library. If frames are reproduced
consecutively, timeout sometimes occurs in DecDCToutSyn().
(MDEC_OUT_SYNC TIMEOUT is printed.) I think Development is likely to have
such a tool. Please supply it as a sample program.
2) MDEC command and VLC header value are set in the MDEC animation
sector in the streaming data for "mov.str" included in CD-ROM. What are
these data? Is it all right to ignore them in a replay program.

3) The sample programs tuto4 and toto7 replay animations. Does the picture
quality of a movie for PlayStation have such a level? Block noise is very often
generated at the edge. Data encoded using Movconv also contains blocks
apparently different in color. Can libpress replay data of GPEG format
created by other tool? Do you have any intention to publicize the bit stream
format?

4) Resolution for the sample movie is 256x167 or 256x160. Is this size
recommended to replay fairly clean full motion movie using double-speed CD-
ROM? Which level ADPCM should I use for sound? Please let me know the
recommended values for setting parameters used for encoding.

Answers:

1) An on-memory viewer for STR format is available. Timing from CD-ROM
cannot be completely reproduced using the current MSW.* because it has no
CD-ROM, but it is possible to evaluate picture quality.

2) The data may be ignored because the original data include the MDEC
command for the header, and VLC header.

3) To secure portability, animation data of text format are put in the header
file in tuto4 and tuto7. there is a problem about picture quality because the
compression rate is increased to four to eight times due o the time required
for compiling. We are studying to provide a function for replay of data of JPEG
format, etc. Each version is controlled using ID in VLC. There is a possibility
that changes will be made to the current version because it involves
problems about the compression rate and decoding speed. Bit stream data
will be made open to the public after such changes.

4) The relations between the number of replayed frames and size are as
follows: PlayStation uses 16x16 24-bit direct color pictures as bases for
processing. This cell is called a macro block. All the pictures are divided into
16x16 macro blocks, compressed into a form called bit stream, and the results
of decoding are also output as macro blocks. Animation decoding speed is
9000 macro blocks per second. This is equivalent to decoding of thirty
320x320 pictures per second. That is, 30 frames per second for 320x320
pictures, and 15 frames per second for 540x640 pictures are generated.

Resolution       320x240640x240640x480...
Frame/sec.       30            15                   7.5...

Either 150 KB/sec. (standard speed) or 300 KB/sec. (double speed) can be
selected as transfer rate for CD-ROM. In double speed replay, data
equivalent to 30 frames per second can be read from CD-ROM if a bit stream
constituting one frame is compressed to 10KB (=300 KB/30) or less, and they
are stored in CD-ROM.

Data size        10 KB 20 KB 30 KB
Frame/sec.       30       15       7.5

The animation replay rate is determined by these two conditions. In double
speed replay, you may compress a bit stream constituting one frame
(320x240) to 10 KB (= 300 KB/30), and store it in CD-ROM. As far as these
conditions are satisfied, you can freely select the number of frames, picture
resolution, and compression rate.

Keywords: Movie


Host machine for development (maker/model No.): EPSON/DECpc
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Library

Questions: When will the VsyncCallBack() function be supported? If it is not
currently supported, what should I do? I placed the above questions fairly
long time ago. Would you please answer them?

Answers: Sorry for having kept you waiting. It has been decided that
VsyncCallBack() will not be supported in future. Very sorry that we described
it in the manual. No. 3 of the root counter is used for detection of Vsync. So,
please use it.

Keywords: VsyncCallBack


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.:

Subject: About Gradation Polygons

Questions: I created smooth a shading polygon with colors assigned to
individual vertexes (the manual describes gradation polygons without
textures) by editing a MAT file in the RSD file using the editor, etc. although it
is impossible to do so using Material Editor. I successfully loaded the created
RSD file into Material Editor, and displayed correctly. However, if such data
are used on a program, they are not displayed correctly. Polygons are
displayed as colored polygons (in the same color as that assigned to the first
vortex). Is not a gradation polygon on the LIBGS level (using tmd data)
supported currently?

Answers: A colored polygon on the TMD level is not supported currently. It
will be supported by the version to be released around the end of July.
Currently, such a polygon can be displayed if colors are directly designated
using GsSortPoly().

Keywords: Gradation polygon, colored polygon


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V (DELL 466/MVX)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S510A
Subject: About GTE Coordinate Conversion

Questions: I am creating a "SUTO" 2 type fighting action game for 2D. Using
320*240 mode, two characters (64*120) are displayed on the double-scroll
BG2 screen. If the two characters are rotated in the following source using
animation data, processing sometimes exceeds 1sync.(This does not occur in
double enlargement, but it does occur in rotation only.) Is this caused by the
performance of hardware, or will the speed increased by addition to the
library? (Is anything wrong with GPU/GTE or library?) This problem is very
important to us in determining future specification for program development.
Please let us know the details, including the drawing ability of 1sync in
PlayStation.
(If you have any means of improvement, please teach us.)

#1       Rotation angle data in animation data
Scale factor data in animation data
VECTOR p0,p1,p2,p3 --> Display coordinates

#2       Local vortex coordinates
Matrix             Rotation angle          (S, Y, Z)
   Parallel translation vector (S, Y, Z)            Scale vector (X, Y, Z)

#3     Matrix setting #4
Coordinate conversion by matrix

P.S. The description of TransMatrix (p.180) and ScaleMatrix (p.181) in Library
Reference Ver. 1.0 Vol.2 reads that a variable whose input is declared as
follows should be used:

VECTOR vec;

 In reality, hung-up takes place during execution unless an array-declared
variable described below is used:

long vec[3];

Is not it advisable to correct the description (including the description of
RotMatrix) of the manual to prevent misunderstanding (if the current method
is to be used)?

Answers: We changed vec and sca into VECTOR, but no hung-up took place.
In other programs, there arose no problem in the description of VECTOR. In
the old library, however, a correct result may not be obtained due to a bug in
ScaleMatrix. In case of VECTOR, SVECTOR is no the same as short vec[3] as
in long vec[3]. To make the description consistent, we would like to use the
term "VECTOR". There may be various causes for a program which is "slow"
or " whose performance is lower than expected". One bottleneck is CPU, and
another is GPU. In operations of the data you sent to us, we do not think
processing will fail in processing because of a problem of GTE. The cause
may be a great burden on GPU or CPU, or optimization is not performed using
the compiler option. Here are some solutions to the problems related to
GPU.

1. To reference a texture area which can improve the cache hitting rate to
some extent because GPU has a cache
2. To shrink a large texture area into a small sprite, or not to perform
processing in which 128x128 texture is pasted to fifteen 32x32 sprites. To
reference texture areas suitable for the size of displayed sprite/polygon

3. To use 4-bit or 8-bit CLUT mode as much as possible because they assures
quicker processing than 16-bit direct transfer Because CPU has a cache, a
program which utilizes many small loops is advantageous.

Keywords: GTE, failure in processing


Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/DECpc466
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About DecDCTxxx

Questions:
/* tuto7 simplest sample */
/ * Replay of background animation (with frame double buffers)*/
/* VLC shall be decoded using the table.*/
/* Copyright (C) by Sony Corporation*/
/* All Rights Reserved           */
/* Decode the first VLC. */
DecDCTvlc(StrNext(), dec.vlcbuf[dec.vlcid]);

  Although the above function is used, I can find no explanation of this
function. Please teach me where it is described. The manual reads as
DecDCTin(bs,buf,nbs);, but the sample program uses two parameters. Is not
the size of the bit stream needed?

Answers: We are very sorry.The version of the manual in hard copy was
incorrect. We are attaching a revised version.



DecDCTReset

Purpose: Initialization of image processing subsystem
Syntax:      void DecDCTReset(mode)
int     mode;

Argument(s):
mode             Reset mode
                 0: Total initialization
                 1: Only processing currently being executed is stopped.

Comments:           This function resets the image subsystem.

Return value:    None



DecDCTvlc
Purpose:    To de-freeze VLC
Syntax:         void DecDCTvlc(bs, runlevel)
unsigned long           *bs;
unsigned long           *runlevel;

Argument(s):      bs                Input bit stream
                  runlevel          Output run level

Comments: This function decodes the bit stream bs, and generates the run
level, which is of the intermediate format, to a level below runlevel. The size
of the run level after d-freezing can be obtained using DecDCTBuSize().

Remarks: A block function. Before executing DedDCTin(), the bit stream has
to be converted to the run level using DecDCTvlc().

Return value:     None



DecDCTin

Purpose:    To transmit the run level to the image processing system
Syntax:     void DecTin(runlevel, mode)
unsinged long *runlevel
int             mode;

Argument(s):      runlevel          Input run level
                  mode                       Decode mode
                                                    bit 0 output mode

                                             0         16-bit direct color
                                                       1        24-bit direct color
                                                                bit 1 STP

                                             0         STP=0

                                             1         STP=1

Comments:         This function d-freezes level below the run level to direct color
images. The results are taken out using DecDCTout().
24 or 16 bits can be selected as the depth of output pixels. In 16-bit mode, the
fifteenth bit in the pixel after d-freezing can be set using bit1 in mode.

Return value:     None

Remarks:       Information on the width and height of a picture generated by
decoding by DecDCTin() is not held in run level or bit stream. These
parameters are defined using data format (such as STR format) for the higher
hierarchy. To prevent deadlock in transmission and reception, data having
the size suitable for the transmitted run level must be always received using
DecDCTout(). In this case, data transmitted by one DecDCTin() function may
be read using two or more DecDCTout() functions, and vice versa. Because
DecDTCin() is a non-block function, completion of actual transmission must be
detected by DecDCTinSync() transmission. If the next DecDCTin() function is
executed before completion of execution of DecDCTin(), the next transmission
is blocked until the first transmission is completed.



DecDCTout
Purpose: To receive decode data from the image processing subsystem
Syntax        void DecDCTout(cell, size)
unsigned long *cell;
int size;

Argument(s):     cell    Image data after decoding
                 size    Data size (long word) to be received)

Comments:       This function decodes run level, and stores the results for the
number of size specified by "size" in area after "cell". The format of decoded
data is 24-bit or 16-bit depending on the arguments in DecDCTin().
A value equivalent to or smaller than the size of the total the decoded data
must be designated as "size". If a value smaller than the size of the total
decoded data is specified, all the remaining data must be read using the next
DecDCTout to prevent a deadlock.
Decoded images are output in macro blocks (16x16 rectangular areas). Data
size must be designated in terms of macro block size (16x16x2 = 512 bytes =
128 words in 16-bit mode, and 16x16x3 = 378 bytes - 192 words for 24-bit mode).


Return value:    None
Remarks:      Because DecDTCout() is a non-block function, completion of
actual transmission must be detected by DecDCToutSync() transmission. If
the next DecDCTout() function is executed before completion of execution of
DecDCTout(), the next transmission is blocked until the first transmission is
completed.



DecDCTinSync
Purpose: To wait for completion of transmission to the image processing
system
Syntax: int DecDCTinSync(mode)
        int mode;

Argument(s): mode                         Mode
                                                    0   Blocked until completion

                                          1    Only the status is reported.

Comments: This function detects the end of the DecDCTin() function.
Return value: Status of image processing system

                 0: Transmission suspended
                 1: Transmission in progress
DecDCToutSync
Purpose: To wait for the end of reception by the image processing subsystem
Syntax: int DecDCToutSync(mode)
         int mode;
Argument(s): mode                  Mode
                                   0 Blocked until completion

                                   1   Only status is reported.

Comments: This function detects the end of the DecDCTout() function.

Return value: Status of image processing subsystem
                         0: Reception suspended

                 1: Reception in progress




DecDCTinCallback

Purpose: To set callback which is called on completion of transmission
Syntax:    int DedDCTinCallback(func)
void             (*func)()

Argument(s):     func         Address of the callback function

Comments: This function sets the callback func which is called upon
completion of transmission. If callback is set, the function func is called on
completion of transmission. If 0 is set in func, no callback takes place.

Return value:    None

Remarks:     Within func, the subsequent transmission end interrupt is
masked. Therefore, func should be returned immediately when necessary
processing has been done.



DecDCToutCallback
Purpose:  To set callback which is called upon end of reception
Syntax:       int DedDCToutCallback(func)
void          (*func)();

Argument(s):     func         Address of the callback function

Comments: This function sets the callback func which is called upon
completion of reception. If callback is set, the function func is called on
completion of reception. If 0 is set in func, no callback takes place.

Return value:    None

Remarks: Within func, the subsequent reception end interrupt is masked.
Therefore, func should be returned immediately when necessary processing
has been done.



DecDCTBufSize
Purpose:    To acquire the size of run level
Syntax:   int DecDCTBufSize(bs)
u_long *bs

Argument(s): bs            Bit stream

Comments:      This function acquires the size of the run level which is
generated as intermediate format by decoding the input bit stream bs. It
does not perform actual decoding.

Return value     Size of run level (long word)

Keywords: DecDCT




Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : GsCELL flag

Contents of questionIn new library's GsBG, CELL indication can be inverted.
Previously, we have asked you about information (parameter) for setting
GsCELL structure's member flag (not covered in the manual). But we have
not been answered.


Answer

Shown below is the bit assignment of GsCELL7s flag member. This is the
same as the CEL file's FLAG field.
HLP : Horizontal inversion
0: Not inverted
1: Inverted

VLP : Vertical inversion
0: Not inverted
1: Inverted

Key words : GsCELL


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DOS/V / PS/V
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Library
Contents of questionFor libgte rot, the return value of flag (for clip) cannot be
understood fully. Please send detailed data materials as soon as possible.

Answer
Presented below is the meaning of a flag returned by a rot function. A
function for simultaneously calculating vertices provides ORing of the
corresponding flags.
MSB31-(30) (29) (28) (27) (26) (25) (24) (23) (18) (17) (16) (15) (14) (13) (11)LSB

30- Overflow during calculation (>=2 43)
29- Overflow during calculation (>=2 43)
28- Overflow during calculation (>=2 43)
27- Overflow during calculation (<-2 43)
26- Overflow during calculation (<-2 43)
25- Overflow during calculation (<-2 43)
24- The output value exceeds [-2 15, 2 15)
23- The output value exceeds [-2 15, 2 15)
22- The output value exceeds [-2 15, 2 15)
21- The output value exceeds [0, 2 8)
20- The output value exceeds [0, 2 8)
19- The output value exceeds [0, 2 8)
18- The Z value in the screen coordinate system exceeds [0, 2 16)
17- The Z coordinate value after perspective transformation is smaller than
h/2.
16- Overflow during calculation (>=2 32)
15- Overflow during calculation (<-2 32)
14- The X coordinate value after perspective transformation exceeds [-2 10, 2
10)
13- The Y coordinate value after perspective transformation exceeds [-2 10, 2
10)
12- The p value exceeds [0, 2 12)
11-0 Not used

h refers to the range from the visual point to the screen.

Key words : LibGTE, RotTrans


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC / DECpc LPx 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : Improper libgte library NormalColorCol

Contents of question

As pointed out in your sample tuto[4-5], the use of NormalColorCol as a library
function for light source calculation results in the destruction of part of
primitive structure. (The lower code portion is destroyed.)
Primitive{PRIM *tag ; u char r0, g0 b0, code ;}
For example, if the structure is destroyed for the collective transfer of four
bytes by sw, swc2, etc., rebuild all libraries so that the destroyed portions are
saved in an empty register. The destruction of a work not covered in the
manual makes it impossible to use the library.Because of the library, a bug
whose cause cannot be identified cannot be eliminated. Before rebuilding
the library, inform us of the names of all the libraries destroying works, and of
the works destroyed, as soon as possible.

Answer

We are sorry that documents are not prepared completely.GTE is provided
with a register for holding the GPU packet code. The function for light source
calculation and RGB value output provides the top of an RGB value with its
GPU packet code. The GPU packet is such that RGB and a code form one
word. Thus, the packet's RGBcd portion can be created by programming the
memory once.The trouble pointed out is due to the improperly set GPU packet
code register in GTE.Set the GPU packet code register properly. For this
purpose, set the GPU packet code at the upper eight bits of the elementary
color vector for the light source calculation function. The set packet code is
copied automatically. If the function has no elementary color vector, use
function SetRGBcd().

Name SetRGBcd
Sets the elementary color vector and the GPU code.

Syntax void SetRGBcd(v);
CVECTOR *v;       /* input: Color vector GPU code */

Explanation

Set the elementary color vector and GPU code v.

<Argument format>v->r, g, b, cd : (0, 8, 0)

Return value None

The following are the functions for copying the GPU packet code:

DpqColorLight         DpqColor              DpqColor3     Intpl
NormalColor    NormalColor3          NormalColorDpq
NormalColorDpq3       NormalColorCol NormalColorCol3
ColorDpq              ColorCol              RotColorDpq
RotColorDpq3          RotAverageNclipColorDpq3
RotAverageNclipColorCol3                    RotColorMatDpq
ColorMatDpq           ColorMatCol

Key words : LibGTE, NormalColorCol


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC / DCEpc LPx 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : Specification of duplex polygon

Contents of questionA duplex polygon cannot be set properly using the Gs
library. The . mat file sets polygon material as follows:
0     2 F T 0 0 0 47 0 47 46 134 -33

Answer

The support of a duplex polygon using the Gs library will be started at the
beginning of September.

Key words : LibGS, duplex polygon


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC/DECpc Lpx 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : Programming

Contents of questionOpenTh() cannot be used, as the method of getting the
current global pointer cannot be understood. What should be done to get the
global pointer?


Answer

The global pointer can be implemented by getting R3000's gp register values.

Key words : global pointer, OpenTh


Development machine (Manufacturer/model) : Maha posya
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : Document of STR format data specifications Contents of question

This question is related to the streaming library document contained in
CDROM (Runtime Library Version 1.2) distributed lately.The document of
interest is psx\doc\lib\stream\struct.txt resulting from defrosting LHA.The
description of the sector header begins on the 97th line. Figure 3 is used to
set out the fields. But many of them are not covered in Figure 3. Some fields
can be forecasted from the contents. We would like to generate a program
on the basis of the information and, thus, need correct data.Please tell us
what locations of 32 bytes of the sector header are covered by field
names.Field names not covered in Figure 3-

id- type    -> StType?- secCount- nSectors- frameCount


Answer

STR format data specifications[Overview]In the PS-X, the processing mode of
reading data sequentially from the CD-ROM is referrer to as streaming. The
STR format on the CD-ROM is defined to implement streaming in the PS-X.
Note: The PSX CD-ROM is based on the CD-ROM XA standard. The STR
format is for the user data area in the CD-ROM XA standard.The streaming is
used typically for sequentially reproducing animation and voice data. It is not
limited to such application. The streaming can be used for all consecutively
changed time series data.

[Streaming data]

In the STR format, streaming data is given as a sequential array of FRAME
data, as shown in Figure 1. FRAME data is used to express a frame of
streaming. The format of FRAME data can be defined by the user at his
disposal. For animations, FRAME data corresponds to each picture. For 3D
modeling data animations, such data corresponds to a frame of data. FRAME
data has its particular type and size, each of which can be set independently.
A piece of streaming data has a mixture of FRAME data with various types
and sizes. The type and size of FRAME data are covered in type and size
fields in FRAME data, respectively.
 FRAME data                FRAME data              FRAME data             FRAME data

Figure 1 Streaming data

[FRAME data]

FRAME data is divided further into sectors as units of reading from the CD-
ROM (see Figure 2). A sector is composed of 2,048 bytes. The sector has at
its top 32 bytes of a sector header for indicating the kind of its data. Thus, the
effective data area of a sector is comprised of 2,16 bytes (2,048 - 32). A proper
volume of dummy data is added to the end of FRAME data so that its start
corresponds to a sector boundary.

Sector header (32 bytes)         Data (2,016 bytes)
Sector boundary          Sector header (32 bytes)                 Data (2,016 bytes)
Sector boundary          Sector header (32 bytes)                 Data (2,016 bytes)
Dummy data
Figure 2 FRAME data[Sector header]

The sector header located at the top of a sector is divided into such fields as
are shown in Figure 3. StSTATUS provides an STR format identifier and
version information. StTYPE indicates the data type of frame data, referring
to the system defined format, when the most significant bit is 1, and to the
user defined format, when such bit is 0. The user can incorporate a particular
FRAME format into the STR format by setting 0 at the most significant bit and
the subsequent 15 bits at his disposal. StSECTOR OFFSET stands for a
sector number in the frame, StSECTOR SIZE for the number of sectors
forming FRAME, and StFRAME NO for a FRAME number in streaming data.
These parameters are used by the streaming library to read FRAME data
without damaging a sector. StUSER can be used freely in a user defined field
by data type.

32 bytes a b c d       e   f g

a) StSTATUS: Sector status (Reserved) -- 2 bytes
b) StTYPE: Data type                 -- 2 bytes sSystem defined format, when
most significant bit s is 1. User defined format, when most significant bit s is 0.
c) StSECTOR OFFSET: Sector number of FRAME -- 2 bytes
d) StSECTOR SIZE: Number of sectors forming FRAME -- 2 bytes
e) StFRAME NO: FRAME number in streaming data (1 - ) -- 4 bytes
f) StFRAME SIZE: FRAME size (by long word) -- 4 bytes
g) StUSER: User defined area -- 16 bytes* Little endian

Figure 3 Sector header[User defined FRAME data]

The user can stream data by the StTYPE field in the sector header. Some
types of data call for grouping attributes common to FRAME as a header. The
STR format is expressed as an array of sequential FRAME data shown in
Figure 1. Assigning StTYPE parameters to a data array allows header data to
be dealt with.

StTYPE: 0x0003          header
StTYPE: 0x0002          FRAME 0
StTYPE: 0x0002          FRAME 1
StTYPE: 0x0002          FRAME 3

Figure 4 Streaming data]

The example covered in Figure 4 separates the header from other frame data
using StTYPE's least significant bit. When reproducing data from the CD-
ROM, the application program can access the StTYPE field of read FRAME
data freely. This allows free data interpretation selection.The possible data
stored in the header is CLUT data (animations) independent of FRAME and a
table of jump to FRAME. [System defined FRAME data]Shown below is the
currently available format of system defined FRAME data.<MDEC animation
(StTYPE: 0x8001)> Figure 4 shows a sector header for an MDEC animation.

             32 bytes a b c d       e   f

Items a) thru f) are explained above.
StMOVIE WIDTH: Width                   -- 2 bytes
StMOVIE HIGHT: Height                 -- 2 bytes
StMOVIE HEADM: MDEC command                    -- 4 bytes
StMOVIE HEADV: VLC header                 -- 4 bytes

Figure 4 MDEC animation sector header [Voice]

The voice processed generally by the PS-X has a frequency of 44.1 kHz.
Unlike such voice, the voice used during animation reproduction is output
from the CD-ROM AD-PCM decoder, as it is. The format of storing such voice
is based on the CD-ROM /XA standard. The following are the voice
frequencies that can be streamed by the PS-X from the CD-ROM drive:

1.   37.8 kHz: Stereophonic
2.   37.8 kHz: Monophonic
3.   18.9 kHz: Stereophonic
4.   18.9 kHz: Monophonic

The above voice is output via the SPU after it has been decoded by the CD-
ROM decoder. For stereophonic 37.8 kHz output as the richest application,
the CD-ROM XA always uses one of the four sectors by the standard rate
drive.

Audio    Video   Video   Video

[Sector allocation in CD-ROM XA during video reproduction]

The PS-X uses a double speed drive, covering eight sectors.

Audio Video Video Video Video Video Video Video

[Sector allocation in CD-ROM XA during double speed videoreproduction]

Monophonic reproduction or stereophonic reproduction at a lower frequency
uses one of the 16 sectors. Monophonic reproduction at a frequency of 18.9
kHz uses one of the 32 sectors. The rate of the voice sector is not changed
even for animation reproduction at 15, 25 and other frames per second. Such
rate depends only on the monophonic or stereophonic mode. The library
passes read data immediately to the CD-ROM decoder. This means that such
effects as velocity cannot be used at a time on the voice. The use at a time
calls for reading such effects into the main memory for transfer to the SPU.
This does not apply to voice volume setting.

Key word : STR


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : Maha posya
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : Combination of movie performance and voice data

Contents of question

This question is related to movies. Currently, we investigate into game
software using movies. We would like to understand the performance of
PlayStation and a method of combining movies with voice data.

1. How many frames can be displayed in a second?This capacity depends on
the frame size. Assuming that movie data of 640 x 480 is created, what
performance will be available?The transfer rate of the double speed CD drive
is 300 k-bytes per second. Thus, 15 sectors of 300 bytes can be transferred in
a second. One frame contains 600 k-bytes (640 x 480 x 2) of data. Suppression
by JPEG by a factor of 10 leads to 60 k-bytes. Five (300/60=5) frames can be
transferred from the CD. This makes it impossible to create smooth movies.
Is it impossible to create movies of 640 x 480? Movies of 320 x 240 result in 20
frames per second with one frame containing 15 k-bytes. Is it possible to
obtain such performance? Please point out errors of the calculation, if any.
While we assume that the rate of suppression is 1/10, please inform us of
standard values, if any.

2. How should image and voice data be mixed in streaming data?Currently
available movie converter MovCOnv1.2 converts image data to the
corresponding MDEC streaming data. What steps and actions should be
taken to add voice data to such streaming data?We shall be much obliged, if
you would kindly answer the above two abstract questions.


Answer

1. Requirements of the number of frames reproduced and sizes can be
accommodated flexibly. Streaming of 640 x 480 is not impossible. PlayStation
processes 16 x 16 24-bit direct color images as basic units. This cell is
referred to as a macro-block. All images are dissolved into 16 x 16 macro-
blocks, followed by compression to bit streams. The defrosted results are
output as macro-blocks.The highest rate of defrosting animations is 9,000
macro-blocks per second. This means that 30 320 x 240 images are defrosted
per second. The rate of defrosting animations is not related to the rate of
compression. Naturally, the image resolution is inversely proportional to the
number of frames reproduced. 320 x 240 images lead to the reproduction of
30 frames per second and 640 x 240 images to the reproduction of 15 frames
of animations per second.

Defrosting speed

Resolution                 320 x 240     640 x 240          640 x 480
Frames per second     30           25            7.5

The CD-ROM can select 150 KB/sec. (standard speed) or 300 KB/sec. (double
speed) as the transfer rate. During double speed reproduction, 30 frames per
second can be read from the CD-ROM by suppressing the bit stream forming
a frame under 10 KB (= 300 KB/30) to be recorded into the CD-ROM. Transfer
speed

Data size                  10 KB         20 KB              30 KB
Frames per second          30            15                 7.5

The rate of reproducing animations is determined by these two conditions.
For example, during double speed reproduction, the bit streams forming one
frame (320 x 240) is suppressed to 10 KB (=300 KB/30) to be recorded into the
CD-ROM. If the conditions are fulfilled, the number of frames, the image
resolution and the rate of compression can be selected at your disposal.

2. Shown below is the flow of conversion on the PC.

<Encoding only sound>
*.wav
 (Windows voice format --- PCM)
MovConv
*.xad
(ADPCM format for XA)
<Encoding only pictures>
*.avi
 (Windows movie format)
MovConv
*.str
(PlayStation movie format)
<Encoding pictures and sound>
*.avi
(with sound)
MovConv
*.str
(with sound)
<Mixture of encoded sound and pictures>
*.xad & *.str
MovConv
*.str
(with sound)

Simultaneously handling sound and pictures encounters a problem with
synchronization of both. Sound and pictures are to be converted into avi,
followed by the application of existing animation editing tools (for example,
adobe Premiere). The above description recommends that MovConv be used
for all conversion. Other tools may be applied.

Key words : movie, streaming


Development host machine (DOS/V) : DECpc XL 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-D5?0

Question : LibGpu function

Contents of questionCurrently, OpenTMD can handle only the first polygon.
When can the subsequent polygons be used? If some time is taken, please
disclose sources.This is all.


Answer

OpenTMD cannot handle more than one object because of a bug. We are
sorry to say that the subsequent version (introduced along with PlayStation
Board) cannot cover this requirement. In the near future, the requirement will
be accommodated.

Key words : LibGPU, OpenTMD


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : GATEWAY2000 /P5-60
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510

Question : GTE's accuracy

Contents of question

SVECTOR (0, 0, 0) as RotMatrix results in:

4094,    0,      0,
0,       4094,   0,
0,       0,      4094
Does this problem stem from the hardware? Does PlayStationBoard also
entail the problem?


Answer

RotMatrix uses no GTE hardware. The problem does not result from the
hardware, but from the software.The rsin and rcos functions used in
RotMatrix are fixed by the sin table 90 degrees (1023) before 0 degrees (0).
Complementary and supplementary angles are used to fix the values of sin
and cos functions other than 0 to 90 degrees. Now, it can be assumed that sin
(just 90 degrees) = sin (right before 90 degrees). Thus, sin (1024) = sin (1023) =
4095. The cos function is also accompanied by errors. Boundaries between
values determined by finite tables require special processing. Without the
processing, errors are produced.The rsin and rcos functions are not
subjected to special processing, because:
1) Any fixed point angles are accompanied by errors (Only angles of zero and
90 degrees free from errors have no meaning.);
2) special processing only at 0 and 90 degrees damages the whole continuity;
and
3) the processing speed is lowered.

As described above, RotMatrix, rsin and rcos contained in libgte do not use
GTE. Thus, the user can create functions of the same level. Attached
RotMatrix, rsin and rcos sources can be resorted to in coding for putting
emphasis on the speed or accuracy.

short *RotMatrix(rot,mtx)
short int rot[3];
short int mtx[3][3];
{int c0,c1,c2;int s0,s1,s2;   }

Key word : RotMatrix


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : Maha posya/
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : Kinds of images applicable to movies

Contents of question

We asked you about the method of combining movie performance with voice
data and have been answered. The question is related to the method. You
said that PlayStation processes 16 x 16 24-bit direct color images as basic
units. Can only 16 x 16 24-bit direct colors be used for movies? Hardware
Guide/OS Handbook Version 1.0 tells at page 20 that the 24-bit mode makes it
impossible to use the GPU's drawing function. Does this mean that the 16 x 16
24-bit direct color (movie) is incompatible with libraries libgpu and libgs? We
are investigating into game software based on combinations of movies and
polygon 3D.
Answer

Currently, MDEC can select 16 x 16 16-bit or 16 x 16 24-bit direct color during
reproduction. (The encoding data is common.)The 24-bit mode cannot draw
polygons but reproduce high-quality animations. The 16 bit mode can also
use the GPU's drawing function, though the color resolution is lowered. Thus,
for ibgpu/libgs, the 16-bit mode should be used.

Key word : movie


Development host machine (DOS/V) : DECpc XL 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-D5?0

Question : Difference file format for MIMe

Contents of question

The difference file format for MIMe includes an object number. A created
difference file contains only data with an object number of zero. What
meaning does the object number have? How can data of other than zero be
created?This is our question.

Answer

The typical TMD is made up of more than one object. For example, for robot
data, hands and feet are created as independent data for individual control.
This creation calls for making each object as an RSD and linking RSDs via
rsdlink. Thus, specifying only one RSD by rsdlink results in one object in the
TMD file, with the object number being zero. Dividing objects suitably to
generate data will lead to high-speed MIMe calculation.

Key word : MIMe


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DEC FR-775JA-37
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S220

Question : 2D clipping

Contents of question

We would like to know differences among Gs library, GsSetDrawBuffClip and
GsSetClip2D functions.


Answer

GsSetClip2D() is used to only assign values to variables. GsSetDrawBuffClip()
references set variables for actual clipping.

Key words : clipping, GsSetDrawBuffClip, GsSetClip2D
Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DECpc LPx 466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Screen division by libgs

Contents of question :

We would like to divide the screen to two upper and lower parts to get the
screen with respect to visual points 1P and 2P. We cannot understand the
method of using the libgs library. Please tell us the method.

Answer

We provide you with sample program. The program, which is for new LIBGS,
calls for updating LIBGS. In the near future, we will send you new LIBGS.

***

Key word : LIBGS, screen




Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S210

Question : Functions of duplex polygon

Contents of question

Reportedly, both the library and the material editor cannot use duplex
polygon functions. When will a new version that can apply such functions be
released? Is it possible to release such version? We need a test version as
soon as possible.

Answer

The subsequent version will support a duplex polygon on the material editor.
The present possible actions are such that two obverse and reverse
polygons are created on the modeler. The dxf2rsd converter as well can
create such polygons for each object.The judgment of the duplex polygons
takes much time. The potential candidate is to introduce a back clip function.
(With a back clip not applied, a reversed polygon becomes a duplex polygon
that inverts the normal for indication.) Such a product will be released at the
beginning of September. A test version will be delivered in the middle of
August.The use of a duplex polygon for higher speed will be implemented
easier by the application of obverse and reverse polygons.

Key word : duplex polygon



Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC/LPx466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : PadRead()

Contents of questionPadRead() is called right before VSync(). Heavier
processing (reduced period until VSync) may result in incorrect reading of
pads. Operation in 1/30 seconds often hinders the input of pads with
processing increased.We guess that pads cannot be read in correctly with
PadRead and VSync colliding with each other.Please inform us of information
and actions to be taken.

Answer

This is due to a bug of microcomputer software in the control pad. The
controller of final specifications does not suffer from such bug.

Key words : control pad, PadRead



Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC/DECpc466
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : MDEC

Contents of question

Currently, we encounter a problem with static images obtained by MDEC.
Values obtained by i = DecDCTBufSize(mdec bs); exceeding 32000 (perhaps
32767) cannot be converted well because of:

MDEC in sync timeout:mdec=6E01829Fd0:chcr=01000201 madr=007DB09C
bcr=04150020d1:chcr=00000200 madr=001241DC bcr=00000020.

Please inform us of actions. Should data be smaller? Smaller data may cause
a problem with picture quality. Do you have other measures? The bs size is
50 k-bytes. The buffer is tested by:

u long mdec bs[20000];
u long mdec rl[51000];

PS.DecDCToutCallback(out callback);Items related to the above will be
retested on an 8/1 version. We will report the results of the retesting.

Answer
Currently, the data exceeding 32767 words = 128 KB per frame cannot be
decoded.Possible actions are such that images per frame are divided into
sub-images to be encoded. Sub-frames provide a smaller buffer size of mdec
rl[].A buffer size of mdec rl[] is not small. We are investigating into an
encoding method for division into sub-frames.

Key words : MDEC, DecDCTBufSize




Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : Apple
Macintosh/Centris650
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H700
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : VAB

Contents of question

We would like to know a method of assigning MIDI (track) used by VAB for
tones in the standard MIDI file. Do you issue a manual for DTL-S710? For
SoundDelicatessen, can STUDIO4 manufactured by Opcode Inc. be used?

Answer

- MIDI assignment

Use MIDI in the same manner as the typical MIDI sound source. For SMF,
specify programs (1 thru 128) to be used by means of the program change.

- Manual

Currently, the manual is planned and designed. In the near future (until 8/16
when the sound tool version is updated), the manual will be released by
BBS.The document will be distributed using a file of Dynaware's MacWord (2.0
or subsequent version) format. Documents of other file formats will be
delivered.

- Opcode's STUDUI4

We have no STUDUI4. Thus, we cannot test its connection. But STUDIO4 is
considered to be applicable, as it corresponds to MIDI Manager.When using
FreeMIDI for patching, install "FreeMIDI MIDI Manager Driver" along with
FreeMIDI. Then, patch SoundDelicatessen and FreeMIDI with PathBay for
Apple MIDI Manager. This allows selective connection to external MIDI
equipment.When using OMS, install Apple MIDI Manager and patch OMS and
SoundDelicaressen with PatchBay. This installation allows connection to
external MIDI equipment. Double-clicking the OMS icon on PathBay enables
the OMS port to be set.Until this autumn, requirements of FreeMIDI and OMS
will be fulfilled.

Key words : VAB, SoundDelicatessen
Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : IBM compatible machine
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510

Question : Handling sprites and polygons

Contents of question
Attempting to display polygons and sprites at a time results in very slow
processing possibly because of delayed drawing. (After detecting the end of
drawing by the DrawSync function VSync is waited for and the displayed
screen is swapped, followed by the subsequent OT drawing by the
DrawOTag function.) Replacing sprites with polygons (with texture) did not
result in lowered processing speed. The simultaneous use of sprites and
polygons makes the processing heavier? Or is this due to a bug related to
sprites?

Answer

The simultaneous use of sprites and polygons never results in heavy
processing. Given below is a general description of such use for your
reference.The drawing is delayed possibly because of the reasons below.

- Drawing neck

The GPU's capacity of operation and drawing is curbed.

- Operating neck

This neck is caused, when the number of vertices is calculated beyond GTE's
capacity of operation.

- CPU neck

This neck is caused, when one frame cannot cover the memory's or the CPU's
capacity of operation.

The following are actions to be taken.

- Drawing neck--

Excessive primitives are not created nor transferred.Obverse and too far
polygons like points are clipped as needed.

-- Texture should be included in the cache.The texture cache is of about 64 x
64 dots in the 4-bit mode. (DTL-H500 has a texture cache of 1/4 of 64 x 64 dots.)
Incorrect hit lowers the drawing capability gradually. Be sure to create codes
in the light of the texture cache.

Note that the CPU as well is engaged in operation.The GPU is a chip having
the operating capability of about 300 MIPS (nominal). The capability is
resorted to when the variation and rotation of a polygon are calculated.
Applying 256 x 256 texture onto several hundreds of 10 x 10 polygons
(unreasonable) results in lowered processing owing to the limit of the
operating capability. Select texture of an appropriate size.
-- The 4-bit mode is faster than the 16-bit mode.
-- A sprite is faster than a polygon.

- CPU neck--

libgs provides high generality, but entails a problem with speed. libgs is a
prototype and can also be used easily by the programming beginner for
three-dimensional matter. Some staff members of the developing department
consider that it cannot fully cover a real-time system (game). According to
principles of computer programs, a dedicated routine provides higher speed
than a general routine. Thus, the customer should utilize his own know-how
to combine libgpu and libgte with each other to generate the routine optimum
to a game. This generation will be dealt with by seminars held by us.

-- Do not resort to the compiler's processing of optimization.PlayStation is
provided with an instruction cache of about 4 KB. Further, it is equipped with
one KB of a data cache called a scratch pad. A loop instruction should be
covered by the instruction cache or the data structure should be designed
properly to reduce overheads. (For the CISC processor, several hundreds of
loops can be coped with effectively by the assembler. For RISC plus cache,
the cache should be used more efficiently.) Our team of development
currently investigates into functions for overhead reduction as in-line macros.
A higher-speed function will be available in the near future. For R3000, the
number of arguments passed by C language should be limited up to four for
high-speed implementation.

-- The assembler as well may be used.Many manufacturers have embarked
on description using the assembler. This strategy has been introduced by
programmers who cannot withstand C's overheads.

- Operating neck

You do not suffer from this neck, if GTE is operating by a correct procedure.

Key words : sprite, polygon, delayed processing


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : Kit/PC or AT compatible
machine
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S590

Question : Object/polygon division

Contents of questionEach of GsDOBJ and GsDOBJ2 is not affected by an
object division bit. The bit can be placed after GsInitCoordinate()? Please tell
us how to use it.Reportedly, in the future, the strategy of appropriate division
will be introduced which is aimed at dividing only the polygons meeting
conditions. Is it available in the near future?
Answer

Currently, no object division bit is supported. The subsequent release will
support such bit along with a higher-speed version.The method of
appropriately dividing only the polygons meeting Z and other conditions can
be applied effectively to removing texture distortion and near clipping. But
the method brings about a problem with a gap between polygons divided and
not divided.

* It is impossible to identify a gap resulting from automatic division by the
library, leading to difficult control.Currently, we come up with the strategy of
appropriate division by object to remove texture distortion.1
. Polygon division (modeling level) along center-line texture
2. Automatic division by object (The run time is controlled by the user.)
3. Object-to-object gap control (The run time is controlled by the user

.)Thus, the appropriate division by polygon will not be introduced into the
library in the near future.

Key words : GsDOBJ, GsDOBJ2, object division, appropriate division


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560 (DOS) DTL-S710 (Mac)

Question : Sound library

Contents of question

Q1: The sound library cannot open VAB beyond 400 KB, if it is not an online
memory?If not, is it possible to locate only the VAB header in an online
memory, followed by ID acquisition and transfer to a local memory to read
data sequentially from the CD? It is not desirable to consume several
hundreds of KB of main memory for sound.Memory consumption can be
curbed by:
- reading the VAB header from the CD;
- acquiring VABID;
- reading VAB data 1 from the CD;
- transferring VAB data 1 to a local memory;
- reading VAB data n from the CD; and
- transferring VAB data n to the local memory.

Q2: Is SEQ opening not terminated normally, if all SEQ data is not correctly
structured? Sound LIB cannot accommodate requirements of compression.
Thus, we will take actions.
 Performance will be accompanied by extension by about 256 bytes by
VSYNC.
Request of BGM from the main program
Extension of part of the corresponding BGM top
SEQ opening
Start of performance.
Subsequent extension by VSYNC
Q3: A previous separate letter deals with voice effluence during reading at
CD intervals.Concretely, for example, data recording whole music over 180
seconds is converted into the corresponding VAB data for storage in the
CD.Read VAB data over about three seconds (stereophonic) from the CD to
start reproduction by a certain method. A period of three seconds precedes
the completion of the reproduction. Reading in three seconds the
subsequent three seconds of VAB main program data allows uninterrupted
VAB reproduction. Naturally, the end of the previously reproduced VAB data
must be identified.XA may make some designed actions possible. Since this
strategy hinders free data handling, however, it is inapplicable to RPG.

Answer

Q1: Divided VAB transfer mode

Currently, the divided mode of transfer is supported. (In the future, the
strategy of the divided transfer will be introduced as the default.) The
present design calls for several KB to several tens of KB of a buffer on the
main memory for transfer.

Q2: SEQ compression/extensionPresent

SsSeqOpen is terminated normally, if the header information of SEQ data
(sequence data resolution, tempo information and start sequence pointer)
can be analyzed. Part of SEQ data cannot be used, as the header information
cannot be analyzed.

Q3: Sound streaming

Large data not covered by the sound buffer (512 KB) should be handled
basically by XA or DA. XA and DA sound as well can be reverbed and panned
in the same manner as for voice. Subjecting such large data to real-time
ADSR and vibration will require the method pointed out.The CD library
designer is examining the sound streaming function. Please inform us of
functions needed for sound streaming, if any.

Key words : LibSnd, VAB, SEQ, streaming



Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DEC/DECpcXL466d2
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S590

Question : libgs and GTE

Contents of question

Question 1

We cannot understand the method of transformation to the screen
coordinate system and of perspective transformation using structure
GsDOBJ for TMD obj.Currently, for this implementation, the following are
called:
GsSetRefView(&View);
GsSetProjection(PROJECTION);
GsSetObjLw(&obj);
GsGetObjMatrix(&obj);
andGsGetObjLight(&obj);

Then, GsSetLsMatrix(&obj. lwmatrix) is called to identify the screen location
by RotTransPers. But no desirable results are not obtained. Thus, obj.tmd is
linked with NULL to set up a non-display bit. The application of
GsSortObject(&obj, ...); leads to the setting of the GTE matrix. But this
process is not applicable to RotTransPers. The application of RotTrans is
followed by perspective transformation. This assumes that the GTE is set in
GsSortObject. Optimized Lib may result in changed contents, making
operation impossible. Please tell us details of the method.


Question 2

Assigning a too large value to VectorNormal in the GTE library results in a
malfunction. What is its cause?

Question 3

Please inform us of the optimum method for processing a large number of
GTE vectors waiting for matrix transformation en bloc.

Answer

1.We can understand your difficulties. It is recommended that
GsCOORDINATE2 be used in place of GsCOORDINATE, because the matrix
can be obtained directly by GsGetLs(). In addition, function GsSetLsMatrix()
can be applied which is set explicitly in GTE. This application provides higher
speed.With GsCOORDINATE2 used, one of GsDOBJ2, GsDOBJ3 and
GsDOBJ5 may be selected. GsDOBJ2 is equivalent to GsDOBJ,
corresponding to the GsCOORDINATE2 coordinate system instead of
GsCOORDINATE. GsDOBJ3 is an object handler for reproducing the PMD
format. GsDOBJ5 prepares a packet for higher-speed implementation. The
sample below covers GsDOBJ5.

***

2.VectorNormal calculates the sum of squares of vector components.
Exceeding 2 31-1 results in incorrect calculation.

3."Matrix conversion" includes perspective transformation? If it is included,
calling the PMD function with the PMD vector data format provides the
highest efficiency. The PMD format is released along with a new library
version. If no perspective transformation is included, the only possible
method is to use RotTrans.

Key words : LibGs, LibGTE
Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500

Question : CD's waveform data

Contents of question

CD reproduction entails data storage in the main memory. Can the data be
applied to music? (Is the data applicable as VAG?)

Answer

The reproduction of CDROM-XA (ADPCM compressed voice data interleaved
with streaming and other data) or of CD-DA (typical music CD data) stored in
the CD-ROM tracks from the second on is not accompanied by data storage in
the main memory. CD data is transferred directly to the D/A converter for
output as sound. 16 bits of data from CD to the D/A converter can be
transferred via the sound buffer to the main memory by means of the sound
library. This function will be supported in the future.Thus, the transfer of data
from CD can be analyzed. But using the data as VAG calls for conversion into
ADPCM for storage in the sound buffer. (SPU can produce only ADPCM's
waveform data.)This means that ADPCM must be encoded in real time in
PlayStation. The support of the encoding function is being examined.Hence, it
is recommended that the data encoded by ADPCM in advance be taken out
via streaming for utilization.

Key words : CD, VAG




Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : EPSON / DECpc
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560



Question : Sound

Contents of question

1. How should waveform data of the VAG format be sampled?
2. How should data for the CDROM subsystem's RT (Real Time) ADPCM
reproduction and for data transfer be created?
3. Does voice reproduction for streaming use the CDROM subsystem's RT
(Real Time) ADPCM reproduction and data transfer?

Answer

1. Applicable is the sound sampled by Digidesign's Sound DesignerII and
AudiomediaII, AKAI's CD-3000 and Macintosh's standard voice input device.
However, the converter supports only AIFF monophonic 16-bit sound. The
AIFF format file is output with your sampling tool before conversion. Any
sampled data that can be updated by a typical sampling tool can be
transferred to PlayStation.The waveform data contained in the VAG format is
subjected to PlayStation's original compression.

2. Data created by Sound Designer II is to be converted by sound tool
RAW2XA or movie tool MovConv. RAW2XA encodes 16-bit stereophonic fs
37.8 kHz straight data such as Sound DesignerII's format data for application
to XA.

3. That's right. Movie data of the video for Windows AVI format on Windows
can be encoded as streaming data on pictures and sound by our movie tool
MovConv.MovConv is included in run time libraries DTL-S590 and DTL-S2100.

Key words : sound, VAG, ADPCM




Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : EPSON / DECpc
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S560

Question : Sound
Contents of question


As the data used for animations (with voice) by streaming, can only movie
data of the video for Windows AVI format be utilized? Or, can separately
created picture data (TIM) and sound data be linked with each other?

Answer

Possible. MovConv is provided with a function for mixing str of only pictures
with voice data encoded by ADPCM. str of only pictures can be encoded with
MovConv. ADPCM can be encoded by MovConv or sound tool RAW2XA on
Mac. However, this calls for synchronizing pictures and sound.If not
synchronized, pictures and sound are converted into avi and way, followed by
synchronization by editing software covering avi. Then, convert avi into str.
The avi compression format does not deteriorate picture quality, if not
compressed at 24 bits. The avi based editing software includes adobe's
Premier.

Key words : streaming, AVI, TIM




Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (Hardware) : DTL-H500

Question : Development hardware
Contents of question


Please inform us of the schedule for releasing new development hardware.

Answer

The present plan covers the release of the hardware below.

(Programmer tool)
(1) PlayStation Board (DTL-H2000): Delivered (substituted)sequentially from
the middle of August.
(2) CD-ROM Drive: Ready for delivery. Delivered along with above (1).
(3) CD-ROM Emulator: Released in August.
(4) CD-ROM Generator: Delivered sequentially (Small number of products)
(5) Debugging Station: Released at the end of August.
(6) Memory Box: Released at the end of August. External SCSI HDD for the
CD-ROM emulator is applicable to limited drives. Please purchase drives,
after we have posted the applicable drives.

Key word : release




Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : Emulator

Contents of question

The emulator currently used utilizes 100 percent of the performance of
PlayStation?The emulation of such parts as the geometry engine depending
on the co-processor by the library lowers the performance? When will we get
an emulator providing 100 percent of performance?If the present emulator
provides 100 % of performance, the processing is too slow. Please tell us the
technique for higher-speed implementation.Please give us a more practical
sample program (covering many objects).

Answer

DTL-H500 provides the same hardware specifications as actual PlayStation.
Such software as the drive library must be enhanced in the future. But it can
provide somewhat higher speed. The hardware as well can offer higher
speed. However, we cannot bring about drastic changes in the present
stage.If the basic routine has been well arranged or the data structure has
been optimized in addition to tuning up the library, the software may provide
capability beyond hardware functions. (Actually, our development
department has implemented a program based on the C language displaying
320 thousand polygons per second.)

Routines occupying 10 percent of a program are run over 90 percent of the
period of execution. We should investigate into whether or not the basic main
loop contains unnecessary functions and expressions and into the
implementation of lighter loops contained in the cache. The running speed of
a program depends significantly on the bit rate of the instruction cache. We
should develop more efficient algorithm.Programs based on the C language
can be optimized variously. The more important point is to optimize a whole
program rather than compiler options. Further, such optimization is affected
by a CPU. For example, in a CPU using R3000 as the core, four arguments for
C functions provides the highest efficiency. This is important know-how.

Key words : target box, performance

Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : Battery backup

Contents of question

Please inform us of detailed specifications of the card for battery backup
(capacity, price, time of introduction, product position and other information).

Answer

Capacity: 1 M-bits (128 k-bytes)

Price: Convenient price

Time of introduction: Along with the main body

Form of delivery: Separate delivery

Key word : Backup card


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : GATEWAY2000
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : Development by Pentium machine

Contents of question

This is my first letter. I am Kondoh belonging to BPS Inc., R & D department. I
hope that you will help us in the future.We plan to introduce a Pentium
machine as the development host. Please give us data for this application.

Answer

Thank you very much for your kind letter.Out development department has
introduced a Pentium machine of GATEWAY2000 P5-66.The current stage is
installation. No trouble of such application has been reported.The AT
machine requires troublesome selection. It entails the drawback that it is
triggered by some errors of Windows installation. It is recommended that a
typical chip based extension board be selected.

Key word : Pentium


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S220

Question : Light source calculation

Contents of question

Subjecting light source calculation to texture results in smaller bit width of
display colors. The calculation is based on hardware (artist board)
specifications.

Is this application possible only on the basis of the artist board?


Answer

This trouble is due to a bug of the GPU. The target box also suffers from the
same symptom. Hardware DHL-H200 released subsequently and a machine
equipped with the hardware are free of this trouble.

Key word : light source calculation


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Monitor characteristics

Contents of question

For a super family computer, eight side dots disappear depending on the
monitor. How about PlayStation? If they disappear, should the upper and
lower dots be considered?

Answer

For the PS-X, the location of the screen on the display can be varied by
controlling the CRT controller, though this control requires a very complicated
procedure. To show the right eight dots, offset the top left point of screen
indication to the left for setting.The display of horizontal pixels depends on
the monitor. An inexpensive TV set cannot cover the left and right edges, if it
is set improperly.We cannot know what type of monitor will be connected and
what characteristics the monitor has. The display location must be set so
that the mean-level monitor meets conditions. Currently, the CRT controller is
set at seemingly appropriate values. The next-generation library provides an
interface for the CRT controller. Thus, the display location can be
controlled.Key word : monitor characteristics



Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DOS/V / PS/V
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Speed Contents of question

Q1: Are semi-transparent sprites and typical sprites displayed in the same
period?

Q2: Which is faster, drawing by multiplying a texture pattern by a certain
brightness value or drawing by only texture patterns?

Answer

A1: Semi-transparent indication is slower.

A2: Same

Key word : sprite


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DOS/V (AIR 486MI Mother
Board used
)Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510
Questions : (1) GTE and GPU        (2) Artistic boardContents of question

(1) GTE and GPU

Is GTE implemented actually only by the hardware? What kinds of calculation
are accessible?We would like to know the speed of GTE and GPU instruction
execution (in one second).

(2) Artistic board

Could you disclose specifications of boards appended to the artistic tool, and
information for preparing appropriate tools?

Answer

1)Nearly all of the functions contained in libgte use hardware "GTE co-
processor". The functions not used include:rsin, rcos, csin, ccos, cln, csqrt,
catanRotMatrix, RotMatrixC, TransMatrix, ScaleMatrix,SubPol14,
SubPol13.The run speed of each function has not be calculated. Measuring
all functions takes much time. Further, the result depends on the measuring
program. The speed should be measured by the user.
2)These libraries are not handled by our firm as products largely because of
political elements. Please contact our business staff members.The delivery
calls for certain reasons.
Key words : GTE, GPU, Graphics Artist Board


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : PC/AT DOS/V
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Screen mode of PlayStation

Contents of question

Currently, the GPU supports eight screen modes. Will new modes be
supported in the future? (Reportedly, 384(H)x224(V) will be supported.)

Answer

This information has been posted by SCE-NET. 384(H) does not cover all of
the 384 dot mode pixels.

(The information below has been posted.)

Addition of graphic system specifications

June 10, 1994

The display modes below will be added to the next programmer development
tool (DEX-2000) and the final version actual machine for the PlayStation
graphic system.

Old version

16 bits
256x240 320x240 512x240 640x240 256x480 320x480                  512x480       640x480

24 bits
256x240 320x240 512x240 640x240 256x480 320x480 512x480 640x480

New version

16 bits
256x240 320x240 365x240 512x240             640x240 256x480 320x480       365x480
 512x480 640x480

24 bits
256x240 320x240 365x240 512x240 640x240 256x480 320x480 365x480
512x480 640x480

Key word : screen mode


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500

Question : Target box and artist board

Contents of question

Can the target box and the artist board be applied simultaneously? Please
inform us of any problems with such application.

Answer

The simultaneous application is possible. In the light of complicated
installation and work, the box and the artist board should be separated. A
potential problem is batting due to changes in board addresses. But any
problem will be caused, if the factory settings are followed and the manual is
read carefully for installation. A high-capacity memory is required.Note that
DOS prompt in Windows is not guaranteed.

Key words : target box, graphic artist board


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DOS/V (AIR 486MI Mother
Board Used)
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510

Question : (1) Stack       (2) GTE          (3) Host machine

Contents of question

(1) Stack
Like typical C, can the stack be applied to automatic variable and sub-routine
calling?

(2) GTE
The "GTE co-processor" is focused on the higher-speed calculation of the
RotTrans function being:
V2 = M * V0 + V1M : Matrix of (1, 3, 12)
V0 : Matrix of (1, 15, 0)
V1 : Matrix of (1, 31, 0)
V2 : Matrix of (1, 31, 0)

Does the software cover other calculation including RotTransPers? Is
RotTransPers3 equivalent to calling the function three times? What speed is
defined by GTE specifications for theoretical calculation (clocks) by only
HDD?

(3) Host machine
We plan to purchase IBM's PS/V Vision as the host machine for the
programmer and the artistic tool. Can it be used? (The problems are the
board size and PS/V Vision's functions as the TV set.)
Can other video capture cards be used for operations as displaying
PlayStation's output by Windows?
Answe

r(1) C's method of using the stack is followed. The typical stack is set at the
location specified by SN ENTRY POINT. In addition, there is a stack for an
interruption routine. Please inform us of any errors of the stacks.

(2) Does HDD mean the hardware? The hardware is not disclosed. You
cannot be informed of any hardware functions and the hardware speed. The
speed of the libgte function can be measured. But the result is different
depending on the measuring program. You should measure the speed.
PlayStation is a real time OS. The measured speed is always constant.

Measured speed = Hardware speed + libgte's overhead + measuring
program's overhead

(3) The configuration should not be introduced, though it seems to be
convenient. PS/V Vision entails a problem with the number of slots. The next-
generation DTL-H2000 uses two slots. The addition of the artist board allows
no further extension. Some types of configuration uses a number of slots,
resulting in severe development. If IBM abides by the architecture of an AT
compatible machine, the software itself is applicable.

Key words : stack, GTE, host machine


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DOS/V / PS/V
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : psx's communications functions

Contents of question

Psx's communications functions are covered by recent game magazines for
metal jackets. The user is willing to accept the functions to enjoy games with
two or more psx functions connected. During the initial stage of psx
development, Sony's engineer said that up to 32 units can be connected
(including units connected to game centers). But a recent document tells that
only two units can be connected. Please tell us the cable capability on fan-
out.

Answer

Currently, products are hatched which cover only two units. A product
covering more units will be disclosed prior to introduction.

Key word : communication



Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500

Question : PlayStation's external terminal
Contents of question

A family computer magazine says that PlayStation is provided with an RS-
232C terminal. Is it true?

Answer
A serial port is installed. (But the signal level is different from 232C.)

Key word : external terminal


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) :
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : Multi-tap, backup cartridge and morphing

Contents of question1.

Out tennis game covers four men for doubles on the basis of specifications.
1.1 Will a multi-tap covering four men be introduced?
1.2 If introduced, when does such tap become commercially available?
1.3 Will other firms be intended to embark on this introduction?

2. An editing player is backed up to prepare special specifications.
2.1 Is the capacity of each of two slots 1 M-bits? (Final product)
2.2 Does the backup cartridge store data for more than one game?
2.3 Can game data from other firms be erased, if the capacity has been
exceeded?
2,4 Are specifications incorporated which allow deletion by a common
hardware menu, like a PC engine and mega-drum?
2.5 Is a common format for indexing needed (for collective indication)?
2.6 Does cartridge removal or insertion call for turning off the machine?

3.3.1 Reportedly, morphing is to transform a character to another one. Can
this function be covered by hardware. Is dedicated software needed? For
example, is it possible to transform a polygon plate character to a human
polygon?
 3.2 Apart from complicated forms, can "A" be transformed to "B"? We
would like to know changes in colors. Is a middle pattern needed?
3.3 Is it possible to enlarge part of the plate for transformation to a human
polygon?
3,4 Can a plate be enlarged like waves (from the center)?
3.5 Can two waves be propagated?

Answer

1.1 A multi-tap is hatched, but no port is designed.
1.2 Not planned.
1.3 Not planned. (Investigation into licenses on peripherals has been just
embarked on.) This is a future issue.
2.1 1 M-bits per unit
2.2 Covered.
2.3 Can be erased.
2.4 Supported.
2.5 A label (heading picture) will be transplanted from the application (game)
to the backup cartridge.
 2.6 Can be inserted and removed during current application.

3.1 Morphing provides high performance effects. As they depend greatly on
the application, however, dedicated morphing may be needed. Only
transformation can be covered relatively easily by same primitive
configuration. MIMe is operated under the same tactics.
3.2 Interpolation can cover forms relatively easily. It is fairly difficult to
accommodate texture information. Color information may be supplemented
linearly. A means is to load the texture area with streaming images to be
referenced.
3.3 Possible. A program for transforming a ball to a human character has
been generated.
3.4, 3.5 Possible, unless loaded mathematically heavily.The above answers
on item 3 may be insufficient. The important point consists in your
technological capability. The identity of a software designer is to digest
software's particular essence ahead of the other designers.

Key words : multi-tap, backup, morphing


Development host machine (Manufacture/model) : DOS/V / PS/V
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B
Question : Usable area on screen

Contents of question

This question is related to edges of the game screen not covered by a TV set.
You have provided the same answer as for SFC and MD. How many dots do
SFC and MD open? Please give us the actual recommended value.

Answer

Firms N and S specify 224 dot height as the safety area. We cannot give you
any recommended value. You should decide about a usable value.

Key word : screen



Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) :
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : Joint pad

Contents of question

The previous answer says that a multi-tap is hatched but a port is not
designed. Is it possible to detect a connected pad for 1P or 2P?With a multi-
tap connected, can a connected pad for 3P or 4P be detected?

Question : Backup cartridge

Contents of question

The previous answer tells that a backup cartridge can be inserted and
removed even with current applied. For example, five persons provide
cartridges saving original characters for repeated loading and removal on
PS-X. In that case, can five original characters be introduced in the same
game?

Answer

[Connected joint pad detection]
A connected pad can be detected by a group of libraries under development.
It may be released along with DTL-H2000. The examination of details may
take more time. Our development department has designed stable operation
even with a pad pointed to.For a multi-tap, such function can be implemented,
though the time when it is supported is not determined. Perhaps, it will be
supported in the near future.

[Backup cartridge]
Technologically possible. The problem consists in software generation.

Key words : joint pad, backup cartridge


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : COMPAQ ProSignia 486/66-1050
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Mode on number of colors displayed by GPU

Contents of question

The PSX's color display is based on the 15- and 24-bit modes. For the GPU's
drawing function, the 24-bit mode is not covered. Why not?

Answer

This is explained in the chapter for the graphic system in Hardware Guide/OS
Handbook for Programmer Tool. The 24-bit mode is such that only the image
data transferred into VRAM can be displayed. The GPU's drawing function
cannot be executed. For your planning and development, this fact should be
taken into account.
Key words : GPU, displayed color count


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) :
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S

Question : RT reproduction
Contents of question

This question is related to RT reproduction set out in the library reference.
During the RT reproduction, is R3000's main memory not used for
transmission from the CD-ROM decoder to SPU?

Answer

RT reproduction in the sense of voice streaming (SD D/A reproduction) is such
that data is sent directly to SPU. Such special processing as reverberation
and echo production calls for SPU. Thus, data must be read into the main
memory. Changes in volume and pan pot do not require reading into the main
memory.

Key words : RT reproduction, CD-ROM, SPU




Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : Macintosh
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H700
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S710

Question : RT reproduction

Contents of question

The library reference describes the three modes below.

(a) DA (Digital Audio) reproduction
(b) RT (Real Time) ADPCM reproduction plus data transfer
(c) SM (Sound Map) reproduction

For RT reproduction plus data transfer, ADPCM reproduction is covered by
the decoder in the CD-ROM. This function cam be used independent of the
sound function offered by the sound library. This description means that data
is reproduced without the main memory. It is possible for the present library
to reproduce data without using the CD-ROM decoder?

Answer

RT (Real Time) ASPCM reproduction refers to an audio track for CDROM-XA.
XA reproduction never resorts to the main memory. The ADPCM data stored
in CDROM-XA's audio track can be decoded only by the CD-ROM decoder.
(The interpretable format is different between SPU and the CD-ROM
decoder.)Thus, XA sound cannot be reproduced without using the CD-ROM
decoder.The data decoded by the CD-ROM decoder can be sent to SPU for
volume setting and reverbation effect application, if needed.

Key words : RT reproduction
Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : COMPAQ/PROLINEA MT
CDS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S590

Question : Texture

Contents of question

With a polygon displayed under the same conditions, the display speed is
changed considerably by the area of texture applied onto the polygon. Is this
due to hardware characteristics? Very fine texture (= large-area texture
space) results in the display of a much smaller number of polygons.

Answer

The drawing speed depends on the size of original texture to be applied onto
a polygon. This dependence is due to the amount of operation related to
transformation."Considerable" changes result possibly from the GPU's
texture cache capacity. The GPU's texture cache is covered by:
- 4 bits : 64 x 64
- 8 bits : 32 x 64
- 16 bits : 16 x 64

Thus, the 16-bit texture provides no significant benefit. You should create a
program on the basis of the above description.

Key words : texture, polygon


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS/V / PS/V
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510B

Question : Texture

Contents of question

TIM data with CLUT brightness values of about 19 thru 23 is displayed as
sprites, with gradation applied. But application as texture results in display
as the same color. This problem originates in the hardware. The actual
product eliminates the problem? If not corrected, we would like to know
actions to be taken.

Answer

The phenomena is particular to MW3. Simultaneous texture mapping and
shading bring about this problem. The actual product and the next-
generation tool will eliminate the problem.For display with no shading applied
to TIM, even MW3 is operated normally by prohibiting shading by the
SetShadeTex() function. With the brightness value (r, g, b) set at (0x80, 0x80,
0x80), shading is prohibited automatically in the GS level.
Key words : texture, shading


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : GATEWAY2000 /P5-60
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510

Question : Migration from TargetBox to PlayStationBoard

Contents of question

Today, we have received the document on the release schedule of the PSX
tool. We have some questions on the schedule.Are the functions usable in
current TargetBox applicable to PlayStationBoard as well?
1. printf debugging using RS232C
2. PC host function and reading to/writing from PC local disk. If the PC host
function is not supported, can other functions be used to program the disk
with data? (Such functions are needed for our data creation.)
3. We would like to know the memory installed.Same as the actual product?
4. I have not been informed of the fact that the change from the target box to
boards requires three boards. Has this been announced in advance?I would
like to know a board size. Please advise us of the sizes of two PlayStation
boards and a CD-ROM emulator card? (Full size?)The CD-ROM emulator card
is connected to an external hard disk according to the attached drawing. Can
it be connected to the built-in hard disk as well?

Answer

1. Impossible. You should resort to an alternative means.

2. PCwrite, PCread and PCcreate will be supported.

3. The memory capacity is 8 M.

4. Though being too late, the document issued by our business department
says so.Both DHL-2000 boards are of full size. We cannot provide you with
data on the CD-ROM emulator card.The emulator card is provided with an
interface for incorporation. Thus, a disk can be built in.

Key words : PlayStation board


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : COMTRADE/PCI GigaByte
Tornado P90
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S590

Question : I and D caches

Contents of question

1) Currently, the I cache stores only instructions and does not store data. Is
the actual product as well so designed?
2) Currently, the D cache can read in data in high speed, but can be
programmed only in the same manner as the other RAM areas (0x80000000-
0x8-1fffff). Is it unchanged in the actual product?

Answer

1) The actual product as well is so designed.

2) No. Programming is also made more rapidly than the other RAM areas.

Key words : I cache, D cache


Development host machine (Manufacturer/model) : DEC / DECpc LPx 466d2
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S510A

Question : PlayStation target box' memory wait

Contents of question

Lately, a run time measurement program has been created to measure a
program's run speed. Results of this measurement tell that the memory wait
value is six waits.Previously, Mr. Okamoto of your firm said that the value was
three waits. Does this difference stem from the actual product and the target
box.Such difference will affect how to create a program. Please inform us of
correct data.

Answer

[Memory wait]

PlayStation's RAM may be somewhat different from a RAM your engineer
assumes. It is different from the past and personal computer's RAMs in
waits. You should believe a value of six waits. But the value is different
depending on the program.

Key words : memory wait, TargetBox


Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H200
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S210

Question : Font ROM

Contents of question

Reportedly, PlayStation will be equipped with a display ROM for a 15x15 dot
font in the first class. Further, some people say that fonts of 13x13 and 11x11
will also be supplied. Will these fonts be installed in the ROM or used for
reading from the CD?

Answer
Our tentative specifications define kanji data as follows:Three gothic fonts of
15x15, 13x13 and 11x11 will be distributed as the library (or data file) for
development tools, covering a set of non-kanji characters, the first and
second classes, and other forms (half size characters and vertical writing).
The standard access function for kanji data will also be distributed. Thus, the
typical method of application will be to link needed data with functions as the
library.Among three fonts, a font of 15x15 covering the first class and part of
non-kanji characters (alphanumerics and kana characters, etc.) will be
installed in a game machine's ROM.The distribution of kanji data and its
installation in the ROM will be posted after the determination of specifications
in early September.

Key word : font



Development host machine (NEWS/DOS) : DOS
Tool model used (hardware) : DTL-H500
Tool model used (Software) : DTL-S590

Question : RAM

Contents of question

Thank you very much for your cooperation.PlayStation's RAM is protected
against resetting? The RAM is now used assuming that it is protected
against resetting. The manual only says that such operations as adversely
affect the memory right after resetting are curbed wherever possible. Does
this mean that part of the memory contents are destroyed intentionally? Or,
does it mean that memory contents are kept in almost all cases but may be
damaged occasionally? Thus, RAM contents after resetting are unstable?
Please answer this question on the basis of the actual product.

Answer

Naturally, the system area (top 64 K) is cleared completely. Taking into
account the process of maintenance service, the degree of a memory test on
destruction is being investigated into. Please wait until the end of August.

Key words : PlayStation, RAM




Host machine for development:      PSV-2410

Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTS-S230

Subject: About Mac Tools
Question:

I have some questions about Mac software. The power PC version of 3D
modeler software "Form Z", which you recommended, will be released in May.
Can data created with this software program be converted into PSX data?
We are going to purchase Mac as a development tool, and we would like to
consider this point in selecting it. Would you kindly tell us which machine
model you recommend?

Answer:

  We asked the "Form Z" maker about your question. They assured
compatibility of created data.

Keywords:       Form Z, modeler, convert

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DECpc LPx 486d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.:DTL-S510

Subject: About Trouble in Creation of Modeling Data

Questions:

   The following phenomena take place during creation of modeling data. We
want to know the way of preventing such trouble. Would you please give us
advice?

(1) A DXF file created using Strata Studio of Mac cannot be sometimes
converted by DXF2RSD. I transferred modeling data, which failed to be
converted, to Strata Vision, and created a DXF file for Strata Vision. I
successfully converted this DXF file with DXF2RSD.
(2) An RSD file sometimes fails to be converted into TMD data with RSDLINK.
Polygons in the data, which happened to be successfully converted, are all
inverted.
(3) If a file created with Meditor is loaded, and saved under a new name, no
*.GRP file will be created.

Answers:

(1) I will answer your question presuming the case in which the result of
conversion cannot be obtained because of abnormal end or hanging during
conversion with dxf2rsd. Fundamentally, dxf2rsd handles 3D data of DXF
3DACE format. Some modelers generate DXF files in any other format, such
as POLYLINE. dxf2rsd tries to rectangulate POLYLINE, but sometimes fails.
Rectangulation takes a long time. So, you may mistake long-time
rectangulation for hanging. Open the generated DXF file using a text editor,
and check to see if there is an entry "POLYLINE". The -nopl option allows you
to ignore POLYLINE, but most of data may be lost. We have not verified yet
in which case Strata Studio fails in format conversion. Conversion is
sometimes enabled if you execute FACET on the Modeling menu before
saving.
(2) It is known that conversion fails if colors are allocated to individual
polygons in a MAT file, or if RSD has two or more textures. We will soon
distribute improved program through BBS. As for inversion of polygons,
make sure that the RSD version (a program related to polygon inversion is the
PLY file) is 940102. The earlier versions handle inverted polygons as
compared with those handled by 940102. Also, use the tools of the latest
version. As of April 21st, the dxf2rsd version 2.0, meditor version 1.0, and
rsdlink version 2.0 are the latest ones. We will be able to give you more
satisfactory answer if you will tell us arguments and phenomena (such as the
output obtained when the -v option is used) during execution of commands,
and input data (creating procedure, shapes, etc.) in conjunction with (1).

(3) We will release improved version. We apologize to you for this error.

Keywords: Modeling, DXF, DXF2RSD, RSD, RSDLINK, TMD, MEDITOR



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.:DTL-S210

Subject: About Sprite Editor and Artist Board

Question:

During use of Sprite editor on DECpcLPx, Windows sometimes hangs, and
Sprite Editor is closed due to an error. We are reported that this
phenomenon is likely to take place during animation work. DECpcLPv hardly
causes such an phenomenon. How the version of the library for Artist
Board upgraded? Can I be supplied with the latest version?

Answer:

 - About Abnormal End of Sprite Editor If you use 256 colors for DECpcLPx,
SYSTEM.INI saved in the directory where Windows is installed must include
the following two lines:
[DeviceCaps]
display-bitblt

If this entry is missing, the behavior of an application on Windows may
become unstable. Be sure that your program include the above entry. -
About Upgrading of Artist Board Library Version The one distributed on
April 21st is the latest version. We have no plan to upgrade the version for
the time being.

Keywords: Sprite editor



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DEC FR-775JA-37
Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220
Subject: About Linkage of Multiple Objects with rsdlink

Question:

 A plural number of objects were linked using rsdlink to generate a tmd file.
However, all the objects, excepting the first one, failed to be displayed. It
was possible to display each object independently. I entered the following
for rsdlink:
rsdlink -o obj.tmd obj0.rsd obj1.rst obj2.rsd

In dumping of rcube.tmd, which is provided as a sample, pointers to vertexes,
normal vectors, and primitive data seems to point at individual objects.
However, dumping of a generated tmd file shows that pointers to the
vertexes, normal vectors, and primitive data point at the same location as the
first object. Please tell me how to link multiple objects.

Answer:


rsdlink -o obj.tmd

In RSDLINK, you may enter the following:
file obj0.rsd pick 0 file obj1.rsd     pick 0       file obj2.rsd     pick 0    exit

Otherwise, create an RSD file containing multiple objects by entering:

rsdcat -o obj.rsd obj1.rsd obj2.rsd obj3.rsd...

Then, enter the following:

rsdlink -o obj.tmd file obj.rsd all exit

Keywords: rsdlink, tmd



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS):NWS-3720/DECpc-LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL2560update2

Subject: About Generation of Objects in Linkage of Multiple Files

Question:
I am performing split compiling by generating *.OBJ files one by one using
ccpsx, and joining them. However, the number of characters in a line
exceeded 128 because of too many files. (See NOTE.) I think that linkage
should be performed by specifying a link file in psylink, but I do not see what
to do to perform the same linking job as I did with ccpsx. (I made a try, but I do
not know if the result is the same as that obtained from ccpsx.)
Teach me how to perform ordinary split compiling using ccpsx, and how I
should do the equivalent job using psylink.
NOTE: An example is given below. Actually, makefile.mak was used.

ccpsx -g -c file1.c
ccpsx -g -c file2.c     ...
ccpsx -g -xo$80080000 file1.OBJ file2.OBJ...-omain.CPE, main.SYM

The program did no accept the last line because it was too long.

Answer:

We are now preparing an answer to the question as to the method in which a
command file is used for psylink. Please wait for some time. An example of
use of ccpsx is given below. ccpsx allows designation of a command line
character string by designating a command file using @filename. Enter the
following in makefile.mak:
#### makefile.mak ####
CC                          = ccpsx
CC_OPTION                   = -0 -C
main.cpe: file01.obj file02.obj file03.obj file04.obj file05.obj file06.obj file07.obj
file08.obj file09.obj file10.obj
ccpsx @main.cmd
file01.obj:       file01.c
$(CC) $(CC_OPTION) file01.c

file02.obj:   file02.c
$(CC) $(CC_OPTION) file02.c
... (omitted)

file10.obj: file10.c
$(CC) $(CC_OPTION) file10.c

 Then, prepare the following file as main.cmd. (Describe what is entered on
the command line of ccpsx as it is.)

#### main.cmd ####
-Xo$80080000 file01.obj file02.obj file03.obj file04.obj file05.obj file06.obj
file07.obj file08.obj file09.obj file10.obj -omain.cpe, main.sym, main.map
###

Split compiling can be done in the manner described above even if too many
files are involved. If you have any more question, please ask us.

Keywords:         Link, ccpsx, psylink



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About 3D Modeler

Question:

   I want to know the detailed specification of 3D modeler produced by
Signos. Will you please send me reference material if any?
Answer:

 We are very sorry that we do not have any material. Currently, we know that
3D modeler in question will have the following features:
- Spline-based modeler
- Texture editing
- Animation
- Polygon editing
- Data preview on PS-X board
The time of release is not yet fixed.

Keyword: 3D modeler

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S

Subject: About 3D Tool for Designer

Question:

Currently, I am using 3DCAD on MAC. I am thinking of replacing it with SGI for
higher efficiency in work. I am planning to use any of the following software
programs:
- SoftImage
- Prism
- Alias
- Explorer

Please teach me about compatibility of these programs with PSX (especially,
concerning materials such as texture, and affinity of data).

Answer:

Currently, SoftImage is available as 3D tool on SGI. A convertor, which
converts modeling data and material data to PS-X data format, is sold as an
option. A converter for Alias is currently being developed. Development of
convertors for other tools are now under review.

Keywords: 3D tool, 3D modeler


Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Material Editor

Question:

If objects are displayed after light source calculations, a 256-color texture is
displayed in 16 colors. Is this ascribable to the specification?

Answer:
If you perform light source calculations for a texture, the bit width for
displayed colors is reduced. This is due to the specification of the hardware
(Artist Board).Keyword: Material editor, light source calculation, texture

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V(DEC 466LPx)
Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: Question about Functions of PS-X

Question:

Would you please answer the following questions?

1. Will it become possible with Sprite Editor to perform "all clear" on TIM or
cell window? Will a menu, which will save a file without changing its name, be
added? MAP allows editing of four banks at one time. Is it possible with the
current version to overlay these four kinds of MAP data on the screen? I
used the bank transfer MAP to turn on the four types of data, but the result
was a failure . Is it because there is no setting for CELL data?

2. Would you please to publicize the contents (source) of the function
"SortBG", which saves a BG structure for LIBGS to OT? BG created using
MAP and CELL can be enlarged and shrunk both vertically and horizontally. I
am trying to change the scale factor from the top to the bottom of the BG
screen. With the current version, however, it can be only done by pasting a
rectangular area to a trapezoid using POLY_FT4 after development in VRAM.
For this purpose, I will make changes to the source if you publicize it.

Answers:

1.      - "All clear" on TIM and cell window is possible with the current version.
All clear will be done if you click the tool (the forth tool from the right end in
horizontal layout, and forth tool from the bottom in vertical layout) to the left
of the cell tool on the tool palette, and then left-click on any desired window.
- For the time being, we have not plan to add a menu which will save a file
without changing its name. - The current version of MAP allows overlay of
four banks on the NTSC television screen. I cannot give a definite answer
because detailed conditions are unknown. The following are possible causes
for your trouble:
- Incorrect setting of transparent colors
On Sprite Editor, a transparent color is given if RGB values are all zeroes, and
translucent flag is off. If the upper bank (having the smaller MAP bank No.) is
opaque when the banks are overlaid, only the data on the top bank will be
displayed. If RGB values are all zeroes when the translucent flag is turned
on, opaque black will be displayed, and only the data on the top bank will be
displayed.
- TIM data failed to be sent to the board correctly.
Necessary TIM data sometimes may fail to be correctly displayed in MAP
display unless they are displayed on the NTSC screen invoked from the "Item
of transfer" menu beforehand. Especially, if you directly select "Map" after
selecting "None" on the "Item of transfer" menu, only TIM data for the
currently active TIM bank will be displayed.
2. Very sorry, but we cannot publicize the source.

Keywords: Sprite Editor, LibGS



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About RSDFORM

Question:

If RSDFORM is executed, a syntax error or "Sector not found" error is
displayed, and the original data are aborted. What should I do to change the
size of the model?

Answer:

The cause may be that the same name is given to both input and output files
by entering, for example, "rsdform -o foo -s 10 10 10 foo.rsd". rsdform
repeatedly reads the input file and writes the output file by turns. Naturally,
the files will be destroyed if the input and output files have the same name.
Even if an extension is designated as in "foo.tmd", it is ignored. (It is
construed as ".rsd".) Inputs/outputs for rsdform are four files (.rsd, .ply, .mat,
.grp), and their extensions are fixed. Therefore, use different names for the
input and output files as in the following example:             rsdform -o boo -s
10 10 10 foo If it is absolutely necessary to overwrite a file, you may create
the following batch file:
> type form.bat
@ECHO OFF
REM Conversion using a name "tmp"
rsdform -o tmp %1 %2 %3 %4 %5 %6 %7 %8 %9
REM Finding the last argument ( = input filename)
:LOOP
IF "%1"==""GOTO END
SHIFT
GOTO LOOP
:END
REM Overwriting to the input file (%0)
rsdform -o %0 tmp
REM Deletion of tmp.* for finish
DEL tmp.*

In future, improvements will be made so as to allow overwriting.

Keywords: rsdform

Host machine for development: IBM compatible
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510
Subject: About Debugger

Question:

Questions about PSYQ source level debugger

1. If a sample is executed on the debugger, it operates on the target, but the
debugger displays the following message:
         "Target did not respond."

Why is the target not recognized. (If the target is reset, the operation of the
debugger can be resumed.)
I start the debugger by entering:

>dbugpsx /e main main.sym

2. Have you any plan to make the source level debugger handle ANSI (C
language specification)? If you have a plan, teach me the time of release, etc.

Answer:

This phenomenon seems to take place because "pollhost();" is not inserted to
the source code. Unless the status of the interior of CPU is not transferred
from the target to the debugger periodically, the above message will be
displayed. Even in this case, the program runs normally. If you insert
"pollhost()" immediately before V blank, time loss can be minimized.
Currently, we have no plan to make the debugger compatible with ANSI.

Keywords: Debugger, dbugpsx



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V(DEC 466LPx)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: Question about Functions of PS-X

Question:

Please answer the following questions:
1. I created CELL data by laterally inverting the part of TIM using Sprite
Editor. When I saw the CELL file later, the portions where the FLAG for the
CELL part is laterally inverted were found to be all 01H. The manual (p.65 in
Hard OS Manual) describes that they should become all 02H. Vertical
inversion produces the contrary result. Is it an error in the manual? If MAP is
created using such CEL data, and SortBG is executed, the CELL is displayed
without inversion. Does not the current version allow such use?

2. I converted DXF data for which modeling was performed using the Mac
modeler "Strata Studio Pro", and I loaded that file with the material editor.
There were transparent surfaces because of the inversion of the face and
rear of polygons. I saved two OBJs (e.g. an apple and leaves) as one, and
converted it. When it was rotated using Material Editor, the two were
separated and turned independently. However, this never took place when I
experimented using DXF created with FormZ. Is there any difference in DXF
data created by these two tools? I suppose both these tools are for DXF for
3DFace.
Will not Material Editor provide a function which will inverse the face and rear
of polygons?

Answer:

1. Sprite Editor of new version has fixed such a bug. A correction has been
also made to a new library which will be delivered to you soon. So, make a
try.
We receive many questions "Is not the current version capable of ..."
You should think that the current version cannot do it if you have failed.

2. If a lathe (a body of rotation) is handled using Strata Studio Pro, polygons
will be inverted. If all the polygons are inverted, you may use the -back option
in dxf2rsd. If only a certain number of polygons are inverted, you have to
select inverted polygons and correct them using Studio Pro. To do so, select
inverted polygons, and click the Flip mesh faces check box for the Edit
Primitive command.
Originally, DXF has no special information on the face and rear. dxfsrsd
judges the face and rear from the order of vertexes constituting each
polygon. (Counterclockwise turn indicates the face.) Both Strata and FormZ
provides correct DXF. In many cases, however, FormZ seems to output data
more satisfactory to us.
The phenomenon that "the two objects are seen to be rotated independently"
is often seen when the face and rear of polygons are inverted. Perhaps, the
leaf portion may be correctly displayed, and the apple may be inverted.
Material Editor will have a function to invert the face and rear of polygons
when it is upgraded in July or later.

Keywords:        Sprite Editor, Material Editor



Host machine for development (Manufacturer/Model No.): EPSON/DECpc
Hardware tool model No.:DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Sound Development

Question:

Will a sound monitor, which gives off sound, be produced by individual
companies? May I have samples if any?

Answer:

Sound Artist Tool (DTL-H700/DTL-S710) has a function to play back waveform
data and sequence data. Playback can be performed using DTL-H200. A
library attached to the development environment includes sound playback
function. You may use it for playback. Please use sample programs which
will be attached to the library. DTL-H2000 is a board for AT compatibles,
which will be distributed to licensees in July. A library will be included with
the kit which will be delivered to you around June 10th. However, DTL-H500
cannot execute these sample programs.

Keywords: Sound, sound monitor



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.:

Subject: About Malfunction of Sprite Editor

Question:

A document tells that the right end of the entire TIM, or a cell or animation
containing the lowest one pixel is not correctly displayed, and that
improvements have been made on the latest version.
Seemingly, screen display is normal, and not disturbed. Nevertheless, is not
screen display incorrect? I checked up using animation display, and found
that the sixteenth line from the right end of TIM display is doubled.

Would you please check by yourself, and give me an answer?

Answer:

Sprite Editor performs texture mapping for quadrangle polygons so that
rotation, expansion, and contraction may be performed in drawing on NTSC.
At this time, the specified area is not displayed correctly unless an additional
pixel is vertically and horizontally added to the texture of the specified area.
However, it is impossible to designate marginal texture which includes the
right end and lower end of the texture page. In reality, a texture smaller by
one pixel is expanded and displayed as such. For this reason, one pixel at the
center of the designated texture is overlaid, and displayed as two pixels.

In case a sprite animation or BG is displayed using the GsSortSprite() and
GsSortBG() function on the target box, such a malfunction is not caused
because cells which need not be rotated, expanded, or contracted are
displayed using a sprite draw command.

Keywords: Sprite Editor




Host machine for development (NEW/DOS):              DOS/V

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220
Subject: About Material Editor

Question:

1) I tried to display black pixels (transparent and opaque) within a texture
properly. Black pixels were displayed as transparent in translucent
processing, but they failed to be displayed in other cases.
2) Will it be possible to bend a texture before pasting it?
3) Why do colors of textures pasted to an object differ from ordinary dyed
colors (e.g. white of the same tint)?
4)Is not it possible to perform parallel translation of textures using keys?
5)Is it possible to designate colors (in RGB32 gradations) in preparation of
ordinary dyed colors as is possible with Sprite Editor?

Answers:

1) If the STP bit in a TIM file is 0, black (R = G = B = 0) is treated as
transparent. It you do not want it to be transparent, you should set "1" in the
STOP bit.
2) Under review currently. It will be July or later if it ever become possible.
3) In light source calculations, there are differences between texture colors
and characteristic colors. This is due to hardware specification.
Improvements have been made on development tools to some extent, but
there remain differences in colors.As a practical means, you may do as
follows. Make a polygon, where you want to mix texture colors and
characteristic color, into two layers. Paste a texture having transparent
portions to the upper layer, and set the characteristic color to the lower layer.
Then, the characteristic color of the polygon will be displayed under the
transparent portions.We are planning to add a function which will enable this
easily to Material Editor.
4) Use of keys for this purpose will not be supported because of consistency
with keys used to translate objects.
5) We will review this problem.To enable color setting, a function, which
allows selection of a color of a polygon through selection of the polygon, will
be added.

Keywords: Material Editor



Host machine for development (NEW/DOS):              DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Material Editor

Questions:

Is not the setting button for the background within the light source setting
window functioning properly?The setting button sticks if the
azimuth/elevation scroll bar is moved to the right end within the light source
setting window.If an object is rotated using the visual point move button,
polygons, which were originally unseen because they were on the rear, will
be displayed in black. (This can be corrected if the object is moved from the
keyboard or by pressing the F1 key. However, this almost always happens
whenever data are newly loaded.)A value for zooming can be entered, but the
zooming function does not work properly.Even if smooth shading is selected,
flat shading ensues if the F3 key is pressed.A warning message "Model is too
large; file..." sometimes appears and sometimes does not even when the
same file is tried to be loaded. Once this warning message is displayed, other
RSD files fail to be loaded by and by unless Editor is reset and re-started.If
the address X = 640 or less is used to load a texture, it cannot be loaded, nor
operation is possible.Requests for improvement and addition of
functions:Loading have to be done each time mapping is performed even
when the same texture file containing the same PIXEL and CLUT addresses is
used. This is very inconvenient. (I request you to add a dialogue window
which allows saving of loaded textures as in polygon group control.)If saving
is done after moving vertexes in "Vertex editing", that status is written to the
data. Is not it unreasonable? (Is not the purpose of this function lie in
movement of vortexes within Material Editor for efficient mapping?)It is
absolutely necessary to display material data, such as object position
coordinates, rotation angle, and scale factor, and it should be possible to
enter those numerical values. (Precision is low on the NTSC screen, and
editing on a pixel basis is impossible.)I want a function, which allows setting of
designated polygons vertically with respect to the Z-axis.Currently, a 15-bit
640*480 pixel TIM file is generated if "Snapshot" is used. Will not it become
possible to generate a 8-bit 256*256 pixel TIM file? (Cut images cannot loaded
using Sprite Editor for editing. It is very inconvenient.)When Material Editor
and Sprite Editor are used by turns, I want screen output to NTSC to be
switched by turns. (As with the previous item, Editors should be cooperative
with each other.)I want it possible to save the window opened within the
editor and its position.A "project" between editors controlled through a path
can only be edited using a particular directory composition. (As a larger
amount of data are used, file management becomes more complicated.)

Question:

When will it be possible to use switches to edit two-sided polygons?

Answer:

Proper loading is impossible, and operation cannot be performed if addresses
X = 640 or less are specified for loading of a texture.

Answer:

Material Editor uses 640 pixels from the left corner of VRAM in the X-direction,
and 480 pixels in the Y-direction as display area. So, no texture can be located
there.

Answer:

The display area and screen resolution will be expanded in future so that the
user can specify them.Requests for improvement and addition of
functions:Loading have to be done each time mapping is performed even
when the same texture file containing the same PIXEL and CLUT addresses is
used. This is very inconvenient. (I request you to add a dialogue window
which allows saving of loaded textures as in polygon group control.)
Answer:

We are reviewing this problem. Now continuous texture mapping will be
added, and a file will need not be re-loaded.

Question:

If saving is done after moving vortex

Question:

If saving is done after moving vertexes in "Vertex editing", that status is
written to the data. Is not it unreasonable? (Is not the purpose of this
function lie in movement of vortexes within Material Editor for efficient
mapping?)Comments:Originally, this function was prepared to modify the
shape of a model. According to our plan, a function for editing of UV should
have been prepared separately.

Answer:

As you pointed out, this function can be used for editing of UV. So, we will
add a function that does not change the coordinate values.
 A "project" between editors controlled through a path can only be edited
using a particular directory composition. (As a larger amount of data are
used, file management becomes more complicated.)lowing:A directory may be
created anywhere as in the following:
foo1\timfoo2\rsd foo2\tim

Question:

When will it be possible to use switches to edit two-sided polygons?

Answer:

Material Editor will support two-sided polygons when the library begins to
support two-sided polygons. We will make a report according to the
development of the library.

Keywords: Material Editor



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): AT compatible
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Conversion of Data Created by Strata Studio Pro

Question:

I am trying to convert data for which modeling is done using Strata Studio
Pro, but i cannot convert them properly for dxf2rsd +Z+Y.Problems are as
follows. No polygon exists where it should, a polygon is generated where it
should not, and the face and rear of a polygon cannot be fixed properly.I
attach simple data converted using lha and ish. It is a thick star extruded
from a plane.    (Data omitted)Please teach me what to do.

Answer:

I checked the data. There are the following two problems:
(1) Failure in rectangulation of the graphic consisting of POLYLINE
(2) The rear and face (part) of polygons are inverted.

About (1)

POLYLINE is a format for continuous straight lines for DXF. In RSD format, it
is regarded as polygons, and divided into rectangles. However, such
conversion sometimes fails. Therefore, I ask you to create DXF, in which the
polygon is divided into rectangles (or quadrangles) called 3DFACE, at the
modeler side beforehand.Before saving DXF, perform conversion into
3DFACE in the following manner:Using Triangle Mesh Options in 3D Sculptor,
perform rectangulation. If Triangle Mesh Options cannot be selected, use
"Facet"t and "Smooth" on the Modeling menu. If you enter 3D Sculptor, a
graphic which seems to have been rectangulated appears on the screen.
Rectangulation is not performed unless these options are executed. By this,
you can avoid POLYLINE.

About (2)

If "lathe" is executed on Strata STUDIO, the face and rear seem to be
inverted. I saved hoshi0.dxf as DXF after performing the processing (1), all
the polygons were inverted. If all the polygons are inverted, you can invert all
the faces using "dxf2rsd +Z+Y -back". If only particular polygons are inverted,
the direction of the face of each of inverted polygons must be corrected. In
this case, execute "Flip mesh faces" and "Flip polygons" in "Edit Primitive" on
the Modeling menu of Strata STUDIO for such polygons.Because DXF
includes no data on the face and rear, many modelers express the face and
rear using the order of vortexes that appear on a DXF file. ("Flip..." reverses
this order.) Therefore, designation of two-sided polygons is not effective in
DXF.

Keywords:        Strata Studio PRO, dxf2rsd



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About ASMPSX

Questions:

         1. If the source (A) is assembled, the code (A') is generated. Is this
due to the specification, or is it corrected in future?
(A)                                   db       1, 2, 3, 4, 5
                                      db       1, 2, 3, 4, 5
(A')                                00000000 04030201 05


 If the source (B) is assembled, an error (B') occurs. Is this due to the
specification, or is it corrected in future?
(B)
          db       (1<<7)
(B')
TEST.S(2): Error: Syntax error in expression
db (1<<7)

Answers:

ASPSX uses strict syntax. If an unnecessary blank is put, what follows that
blank is regarded as a comment.

e.g.              db       1        this is a comment

As an exception, a blank after "," is regarded as a blank.e.g.
                 db 1, 2, 3

(i) To have the blanks ignored, enter the following in the file:
opt ws+
(ii) Otherwise, designate /ows+ option in asmpsx before assembly. In either
case, a comment will have to be demarcated with ";".

Keywords:         asmpsx



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500C
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500C
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510A

Subject: About Sprite Editor

Questions:

Will controllability of Sprite Editor be improved?
1) Will the functions for color masking and selection of thickness of lines in
dot drawing, and tools necessary for sprite drawing (dot illustration) such as
spray and tiles added in future?
2) Currently, it is possible to copy a palette. Will it become possible to move
the palette (exchange of selective palettes and overwriting without
destroying position data in dot drawing)?
3) Is it possible to form a plural number of TIM data drawn in 16-color mode
into one 256-color TIM data?
4) If a cell is placed at the left top corner in mapping on the map display
screen, the display data for the portion where the cell is placed is displayed
all over the TV screen, and no other cell data are displayed.

Answers:

1) We are planning to enable change of thickness of lines. However, we
have no plan to add the mask function, spray and tiles, etc.
2) We are planning to add the function for movement of a palette.
3) It is impossible because conversion from 16-color mode to 256-color mode
is not supported.
4) I suppose you placed a cell on the left top corner of the cell display
window. Because map data are zero (the value indicating the cell on the left
top corner of the cell display window) in the initial status, if a cell is put on the
left top corner of the cell window, the data for that corner are displayed on
the entire map window. Therefore, if a cell is registered on the left top corner
of the cell display window after editing is done for the map bank 1 and
subsequent map banks and nothing is edited in the map bank 0, the TV
screen will be filled with such cells. If you perform editing in the map bank 0,
or turn off 0 for the transfer map bank, the map under editing will be
displayed.

Keywords: Sprite Editor



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DECpcLpx466d2
Hardware tool model No.:
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210
Subject: About Graphics Artist Tool

Questions:

The "-quad" option in "dxf24sd.exe ver2.3" seems to be invalid.Even if this
option is selected, a quadrangle is divided into two triangles.I am using "Form-
Z" as modeling tool.Sometimes, a warning message "Fail to triangulate!"
appears, and some polygons in the generated RSD file are missing.What does
this message mean, and what should I do in such a case?

Answers:

Concerning the failure in correct output of quadrangles, count the number of
polygons in the converted RSD by entering "dxf2rsd -v..." in each case in
which "-quad" is selected, and not selected. Even if quadrangles are
correctly generated, they are displayed as triangles on Material Editor.
(Improvements will be made on Material Editor in upgrading of the version in
July.)"Fail to..." appears when shape expression for DXF called POLYLINE is
converted. In POLYLINE, continuous straight lines constitute a polygon. In
RSD format, it must be divided into rectangles (or quadrangles). In some
cases, rectangulation fails. So, designate another expression (triangles or
quadrangles) called 3DFACE when you are going to output DXF using Form Z.
In the dialogue displayed when you select DXF in "Save as", click the "Export
All Faces As 3D Faces" button. (If you further check "Triangulate Faces", all
the faces will be divided into triangles.)In case of POLYLINE, a quadrangle is
divided into triangles even if you select "-quad" as you pointed out in the first
question. In this case, create DXF using 3DFACE rectangles.

Keywords: dxf2rsd



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210

Subject: About Objects for MIMe



Questions:

I tried to test MIMe, but I am at a loss because the number of normals varies
in each pause.I created data in the following manner. First, I created each
pause using commercially available modeler, converted it into a DXF file, and
then converted it into an rsd file. Up to this point, the vortexes of each pause
have complete correspondence.These rsd files were loaded into Material
Editor, and specified smooth shading for all the polygons, and then specified
flat shading for some particular polygons. (I wanted to express part of the
object as flat.)Those steps were followed for all the pauses.

However, it is impossible to create a data file for MIMe from those pause data
because the number of normals varies in each pause.I used the group control
function of Material Editor to select polygons which should undergo flat
shading, and created similar group files for all the pauses. Therefore,
designation (flat or smooth) of shading for each polygon should have the
same structure in each pause.The above procedure may be wrong, but what
should I do?Please reveal a good idea (or tool) to me.

Answers:

I verified a phenomenon that normals lose correspondence when data are
loaded into Material Data. (It seems that processing for smooth shading is
executed.)We are now reviewing this problem so as to assure
correspondence.In principle, MIMe processing is impossible unless
correspondence is secured because MEMe processing is simple
interpolation. However, fimefilt, which were delivered to you, generates a
correct vortex differential file even if correspondence of normals are
incorrect so fa as the vortexes have correct correspondent relations.Use the
*/vdf file only without using the wrong *.ndf file, and use the following
function as comment-out:

main ()
{
                ...
set_nromal_mime_data ();
                ...
normal_mime ();
                ...
Keywords: MIMe



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/DECpc466
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About MOVCONV.EXE

Questions:

I have the following questions about MOVCONV.EXE in CDROM, which was
delivered to me the other day.
(1) When I tried to convert a non-compressed AVI file using MOVCONV, a
message "Bad image size in RGB mode (160 x 120)" appears, and conversion
failed.
(Then, a system error occurred, and I was asked to close the application.)

 (For conversion, I used data attached to Tech LOGIN CDROM#2.
\TECH2\2_VFW\CH2\COMPRESS\8_FULL.AVI 1, 087, 702 94-02-07 6: 06)

What restrictions do the image size have in conversion?

(2) Is there any plan that this tool will handle QT format of Mac? Is there any
existing tool which converts Mac QT into non-compressed AVI?

(3) I want to compress a still picture, and hold it on CDROM or RAM. What tool
or library can I use for this purpose?          (The original format of the still
picture is MacPICT or BMP.)

Answers:

1) Help fails to give full explanations, but encode for MDEC must be a multiple
of 16 both vertically and horizontally.

2) For the time being, there is no plan to have NovConv directly support QT
format. Format conversion between QT and AVI can be performed on Mac
using the converter attached to Video For Windows as a standard device.
Using the Windows version of adobe Premiere, a QT file can be directly
loaded.Currently, it is impossible to convert only one still picture. We are
thinking of adopting such a function in the next upgrading of the version (7/1,
or 8/1).

Keywords:        MovConv



Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DECpcLPx
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Tools
Question:

Can I use data, whose form has been changed after vortex editing with ORM-
Z, for MIMe without any trouble?Do DXF format data generated using Kouei-
produced Cyclone have interchangeability with DXF data generated using
FROM-Z?I am thinking of purchasing FORM-Z. Please answer my questions
as soon as possible.


Answers:

If only the vortexes are to be moved, any modeler will enable use of MIMe.
However, a modeler, which has only such a high function that it automatically
insert vortexes for smoothness as the form is being changed, cannot perform
MIMe. Form-Z seems to be suitable for MIMe because it has a function which
can change the form without changing the number of vortexes. However, you
must take care in operation not to allow one vortex put on another as if they
were one vortex.I am not sure because I have only a test version of Cyclone
Solid at hand. However, Cyclone seems to have high interchangeability
because the on-line manual tells that data can be converted into 3DFACE
format DXF by the converter. (Form-Z sometimes fails to read DXF of
POLYLINE format correctly.) However, a problem that the face and rear are
inverted may arise. (You will have to invert polygon faces.)

Keywords: MIMe, Form-Z, Cyclone, DXF



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/DECpc466

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About LibPress



Questions:

I want create data (compressed image data) which can be used with
LibPress. I am at a loss because no compressed library function is supported.
I would like to ask the following questions:

(1) When an image data (still picture) compression tool will be released?      -
I have 2000 to 3000 still pictures of 544x400 dots. It is a hard job for me to
manually process each still picture using Movconv. I would be much obliged if
I could use a tool which can be entered from a DOS command line.

(2) If such a tool is to be distributed much later, is it possible to write a
compression tool by myself? (Naturally, I will not be able to write such a tool
unless I can have a document because the details of compression format are
unknown.)

(3) In connection with the above questions, Movconv seems to be able to
convert images in a QT movie only. How should I convert voice attached to
the movie?

 I will be much obliged if I can have a tool which can convert images and voice
at one time.

Answers:

(1) The function for conversion of one still picture at one time will be available
in the new version of MovConv released in August 1st. (It may be released
earlier than scheduled because we have many such requests.)We have no
plan to release a conversion tool that runs on DOS.You can convert two or
more files using MovConv if you enter the following so that Movconv can
recognize filenames as a row of still pictures:

...
xx0045.tim
xx0046.tim
xx0047.tim
...

(2) You will not be able to do so because the details of compression format
are not publicized.

(3) Conversion of voice will become possible in the new version to be
released on July 1st. Then, you will be able to convert an avi motion picture
with voice into PlayStation Movie. For this purpose, ADPCM encoding will be
performed for voice. (MovConv is not intended for use with QT. For
conversion from QT, you have to use a converter attached to "Video For
Windows", or any other converter.)

Keywords: LibPress



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DOS/V, PS/V
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About TMD Format

Questions:

I suppose the following steps are followed when creating a polygon object
using 4-bit (8-bit) texture:
(1) To generate a modeling data using Home G, etc.
(2) To convert dxf data into rsd data.
(3) To generate texture data using Sprite Editor (produced by Sony)
(4) Paste the texture using Material Data (produced by Sony)
(5) To generate tmd data using rsdlinkOn which stage are CPA (VRAM
coordinates of CLUT), TSB (texture page), and other numerical values for
composition of packet data in the primitive part of the tmd data
determined?In Sprite Editor, there is no setting item for determination of the
CLUT position. In Material Editor, texture cannot be read into the area from 0
to 40 on the x-axis and from 0 to 480 on the y-axis. I am at a loss what to do.

Answers:

These values are set in the header of a TIM file. They are specified when
data are converted using an option such as rgb2tim, or changed using timpos.
You can enter these values on Material Editor when a texture is loaded, but
the TIM file is not preserved. You have to make changes using timpos
later.Generally, appropriate RAM assignment must be performed because
TMD uses two or more textures. You should think that this can be performed
when all the textures have been confirmed, or immediately before rsdlink.
Determine VRAM assignment using timpos immediately before rsdlink.
(Ordinarily, texture data are placed in x >= 640, and CLUT is placed in y >= 480.)
These values need not be the same values set in Material Editor. rsdlink
searches the RSD file to find a texture file, and sets CBA and TSB for TMD.

Keywords: TMD

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210

Subject: About Video Output of Sprite Editor

Question:

Using Sprite Editor, I generate 320 x 240 graphics. When the data are output
to the video from Artist Board, about one forth at the right end is cut off.
What should I do to output the entire screen?

Answer:

You can create only a 256 x 256 (or smaller) image using Sprite Editor. If an
image of the greater size is loaded, it is divided into two or more banks. Artist
Board only outputs image data in the currently active bank. If you load 320 x
240 data, about one fourth at the right end is cut off because an image having
the size of 256x256 or smaller can be displayed at one time.Output of image
data having the size of 256x256 or more is not supported. By saving data read
into multiple banks to the cell map, data having the size of 320x240 can be
virtually displayed, but response speed in image editing will be extremely
reduced.

Keywords: Sprite Editor

Host machine for development:
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H
Software tool model No.: DTL-

Subject: About 3D Tool

Questions:

Please answer the following questions:
1. We are trying to find a tool suitable for 3D modeling/animation. Would you
please teach us addresses which we can contact to purchase a tool you may
kindly recommend for DOS/V? 2.

In conjunction with 1 above, we are collecting information on "3D Studio"
produced by Autodesk. We converted a DXF file, which Autodesk sent us,
using"3D STUDIO", the following error message appeared:
                dxf2rsd -info b1_r12.dxf

(C) 1994 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved.
 Input DXF file: b1_r12.dxf
WARNING: LAYER is ignored (line= 84)
WARNING: Unknown DXF code: 134("134") line=231
WARNING: Unknown DXF code: -8("-8.880890") line=239
Unexpected EOF:
TABLES "30" line=240

I cannot find whether the tool has a defect, or the file has dust.

3. I executed "Layout.exe" from File Manger, and started a demonstration
program for "Hand" as described in LAYOUT.TXT dated July 1st. However,
"Key Recorder" dialogue failed to appear. Did I made a mistake in
installation? Once again, please teach me how to install Layout Tool.

Answers:

1) There are few 3D modelers that run on DOS/V. It is possible to convert
DXF files which are output from any of the following modelers:
Sculptura                        Rober McNeel & Association
Phone: (206) 547-7000, US
Fax: (206)547-7321, US

Alias UpFront
Focal Point Computer Co., Ltd.
Phone: 03-5484-0147

Cyclone Solid
Kouei Co., Ltd.
Phone: 045-561-6861

To our disappointment, these are not intended for games. So, we cannot
recommend any. Recently, Caligari, of Canada, released a 3D integral
environment called "trueSpace. It has some problems when used for games.
However, the version will be upgraded within the year.

2) We tried a sample for 3D Studio. A similar error occurs due to an empty
line in the DXF file. We do not know why there is such an empty line. We think
conversion will be possible if you write something (anything) on that line.
Also, see if DXF contains a "POLYLINE" line. Currently, dxf2rsd can convert
DXF containing POLYLINE, but the face and rear of polygons are sometimes
inverted. You can convert DXF correctly if it contains a "3DFACE" line instead
of a "POLYLINE" line. We think that 3D Studio allows designation to output
3DFACE, but we are not sure.I recommend you to contact Autodesk for
confirmation. If it is impossible to output 3DFACE, then the current version of
dxf2rsd cannot perform conversion to our disappointment.

3) The currently available Layout Tool has the layout function only, and it has
no animation function. Therefore, you cannot use the "Key Frame Recorder"
dialogue as yet.Keywords: Modelers, dxf2rsd



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC Japan/DECpc XL
466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Conversion of SOFTIAMGE File into RSD File

Questions:

When a file generated using SOFTIMAGE is converted by entering a
soft2Sony (DTL-S260) command, the following inconveniences are
encountered because the version is @RSD940101:- If there is no material
designation, conversion is suspended halfway when RSDFORM.EXE is
executed.
Contents of imo4.mat
@MAT940101
#
# Number of Materialberof ate
# Material list
#M

Output message

(C) 1994 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved.
WARNING: "imo4.rsd" is old.
Converting to new version.
WARNING: "imo4.ply" is old.
Converting to new version.
WARNING: "imo4.mat" is old. Converting to new version.

 - Only .RSD and .PLY files are created.
- To convert a file into a TMD file using RSDLINK.EXE, I have to load and save
it using Material Editor with the version designated as @RSD940102.
 - When RSDLINK.EXE is used the contents of a generated TMD file differ from
@RSD940101 and @RSD940102.
@RSD940101 72256 (converted using soft2Sony)
@RSD940102 49368 (The file was loaded and saved using Materia       l Editor.)

I do not specify any option for conversion using soft2Sony.Can I use an option
for RSDFORM RSDLINK?Do you have any plan to solve the above problem in
any future version of soft2Sony?

Answers:

We will give a solution to the above problem in the next versions (to be
released on August 1st) of RSDORM and RSDLINK. For the time being, please
use Material Editor in combination. We have no plan to upgrade the version o
soft2Sony currently.

Keywords: soft2Sony



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): apple/Centris650
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H700
Software tool model No.: DTL-S710

Subject: About Operation of DHL-S710

Question 1

A problem arose in SEQ playing using DHL-S710. A malfunction was
confirmed in SoundDelicatessen Ver 1.0.0 through 1.0.2.When a particular
sequence was played using SoundDelicatessen, I found a malfunction that
reproductivity was extremely high.

(1)     VAB tone set was set as follows:

Prog                      #tone                     name
14                        FatSAW           15

       FastSAWIn either case, the setting of "Tone" was the same, and the
same VAG was used.

(2) I used multiple channels (two tracks for verification) utilizing the above
program (tone) on the MIDI sequencer, and described total four bars of a troll
consisting of dotted eighth notes in quarter measure. Suppose "-" stands for
a sixteenth note, and voice is given off. (In this example, the music piece was
played legato.)The music piece was played from left to right. "=" stands for
no tone.

(MIDI Channel 2: Program 14)
G-4                               =----             F4               E4
E-4            F4                 D-4

(MIDI Channel 3: Program 15)
G-4                               =----             G                E4
       E-4             D4                  D-4

(3) When the above sequence is played, the following malfunction occurs:

When E4 in Channel 2 is noted off, E4 in Channel 3 is also noted off through it
should not. If the same condition takes place, what follows E4 are also noted
off.

It seems that sound is muted regardless of the MIDI Channel (Track) when
SoundDelicatessen tries to note off a scale which is being played by the same
VAG. Such trouble does not arise when another VAG is assigned.I suppose
channels and synthesizer ordinarily control in concert. It can be a mistake on
my part. For your reference, I am attaching a dump list of SEQ. The results of
my analysis show no malfunction. Please give me advice.

00000000        01     80          07    A1         20    04          02      00-C1
         0E     00     C2          0F    00         91    4C          *division,
tempo..000000105B      82          20    92         4C    5B          86
         60-91 4C      00          00    4A         5B    81          40      *offset 8
-> Seq. ?00000020      4A          00    00         4C    6E          60      92
         4C-00 00      4A          5B    60         91    4C          0000000030
         00     4D     49          60    92         4A    00          00-4C 6E
         81     40     4C          00    00         4D00000040        49      82
         20     91     4D          00    00         4D-49 82          20      92
         4D     00     00          4D00000050       49    82          20      91
         4D     00     00          4F-49 82         20    92          4D      00
         00     4F00000060         49    60         91    4F          00      00
         4C     5B-82 20           92    4F         00    00          4C
         5B00000070    89          60    91         4C    00          00      92
         4C-00 00      FF          2F    00

I also found a phenomenon in which NoteOn was not performed. This seems
to have occurred under the similar conditions.

Question 2   title: about development support materials DHL-S710/S700

I found many parameters whose meanings I cannot understand. I also found
many numerical values whose upper and lower limits and notation (Dec or
HEX) are not specified. If possible, would you please furnish me with a
detailed development materials?


Answer to Question 1:

We conducted a similar test, and we also found trouble as you pointed out. It
seems to be a bug in the sound library. We will fix it as soon as possible.In the
next version (July 18) of Sound Tool, the bug will be removed. The problem is
solved in DTL-S21xx attached to DTL-H2000.

Answer to Question 2:

We must apologize to you for supply of the incomplete tool manual. We are
preparing tool documents. Please wait for some time.In upgrading of the
version in August 16, an on-line document will be uploaded.

Keywords: DTL-S710, SoundDelicatessen



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): PS/V Model 2410
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H700
Software tool model No.: DTL-S710

Subject: Failure in Conversion of 8-bit AIFF Data

Questions:
(1) Is it possible to convert 8-bit (sampling frequency: 11kHz) AIFF data?
(When will it become possible?)I tried to convert 8-bit (sampling frequency:
11kHz) AIFF data using AIFF2VAG, a message "Only 8-bit/16-bit sample can be
converted." appeared, and conversion failed.

(2) I want to convert a large quantity (about 1000) of 8-bit audio into VAG
format using AIFF2VAG. I want to have a function which allows batch
processing or conversion of the entire folder. Can I have such a function?(I
do not mind if such function is provided using a combination of existing tools.)

Answers:

(1) We are very sorry. It is a bug in the error message.As described in the
document source data for the converter are fixed at 16 bits. This is due to the
specification of the sound chip SPU installed in PlayStation. Resolution for
other than 16 bits is not supported.Please generate all data in 16-bit length.If
necessary, you can create a tool which converts 8-bit data into 16-bit data
inside the converter, and then converts them into VAG. (The rate of
compression is adversely affected because data are equivalent to 16-bit
data.)

(2) You can use the drag & drop function for the current converter, but you
are asked a filename.We will review this problem further because we can
employ a method in which conversion will be performed with an extension
".vag" attached automatically.If such changes are made to the specification,
you will be able to select multiple files, and convert them at one time.

Keywords: AIFF, AIFF2VAG




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/Lpx 466d2
Hardware tool model name: DTL-H200
Software tool model name: DTL-S210

Subject: About Shading of Polygons

I have a question about shading of polygons. If the case in which light source
calculations are not performed (set to fixed colors) is compared with the case
in which flat or smooth shading is performed, to what degree the former is
favorable (how much processing is lightened)?I will use objects, such as
mountains and buildings, whose faces do not move with respect to the light
source.If bright fixed colors are given to the faces exposed to the light, and
dark fixed colors are given to the faces not exposed to the light, the same
effect as light source calculations can be obtained.However, it is almost
impossible to set colors shaded manually.I request you to provide a function
which sets fixed colors to polygons according to the direction of the light set
using the light source menu of Material Editor as if shading were performed.
It would be wonderful if I had a function which sets colors of polygons (to
gradation colored polygons if smooth shading has been performed) to shaded
colors (colors as they are displayed on the monitor) by pressing a button after
colors of an object have been set using Material Editor.This may be a request
rather than a question, but please give a due consideration to it.
Answers:

If light source calculations are to be performed for each frame, the following
disadvantages will be involved:

 - Frequency of memory access increases (because you have to rewrite the r,
g, and b fields of primitives for each frame).
- A load on GTE increases.The influence will be especially great in case of
smooth shading polygons.In some cases, the speed will be about 30% slower
if light source calculations are performed.We will make changes to the
specification of Material Editor, and we will be able to meet your request in
the new version to be released on August 1st.

Keywords: Polygon, shading, Material Editor




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/DECpc LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Material Editor Ver 1.5

Question:

I cannot do settings for two-sided polygons.I checked an outfile ".mat", and
found that the flag remained to be 0.      Example:
0        2 F T 0 0 0 47 46 134 -33

I expected this.

0   0 f T 0 0 0 47 46 134 -33

However, the result was this.
Material Editor did not seem to display two-sided polygons.

Answer:

A library for drawing of two-sided polygons will be released in early
September. We will enable Material Editor to generate two-sided polygons as
the library is released.

Keywords: Material Editor

Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V, MAC QUADRA840AV

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200, DTL-H500, DTL-H500C, DTLH-700
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210, DTL-S510A, DTL-S510B, DTL-S560

Subject: About Software for Sound Development

Question:
I have a question about waveform editing software.I am thinking of
purchasing "Alchemy" because I happened to find it in a certain store. Can
this software program read and process PCM data loaded into a Mac model?
(I asked a clerk of the shop, but he answered he did not know.)I am using
840AV, but has no any other special sampler, etc. So, I want to use Mac for
sampling and processing. If "Alchemy" does not allow this, will I have to have
"AudioMaterial" or any other hardware set?Please answer my question.

Answer:

It is possible to perform waveform editing using Alchemy and the voice input
device in Quadara 840AV.Because Alchemy has no recording function, voice
has to be entered using the standard voice input function (by using "Add..." in
"Sound" on the control panel) of Macintosh. Then, you have to follow
complicated steps. That is, you double-click the "System" file in the system
folder, and drag the sound resource file out of the folder, and open the file
using Alchemy. The A/D converter attached to the machine is not of high
quality. We recommend a sampling tool "AudiomediaII".Alchemy is used by
many customers because it has excellent re-sampling and looping functions.
You can get the most out of Alchemy by using a sampling tool such as
"AudiomediaII" in combination.

Keywords: Sound, Alchemy, AudioMediaII




Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V (DEC 466LPx)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About PlayStation Tools

Question:
Please answer the following questions:

1. About PlayStation Controller
I am trying to devise a command input method in a fighting game. The "+"
button on the controller released in the past is divided into four parts. In an
answer to a certain question, you said, "A cover will be put on the "+" button,
and the four parts of this "+" button will be connected. I touched a mock-up in
a seminar opened previously, the "+" button was linked inside the
controller.Will not a cover be applied at all, or will it be an option?
2. About development devices
In connection with the question I placed on May 24th, please teach me a
recommended hard disk model to be connected to the CDROM emulator.
3. Will you please reveal the date of release of the PSX board of the
programming tool if it is fixed?

Answers:

1. Changes have been made to the specifications because of license and
design. We apologize to you for furnishing incorrect information.
2. CD-ROM Emulator is developed to meet particular SCSI HD models
produced by particular makers.We cannot let you know the usable HD models
as yet. We will announce them when arrangements have been made.I
recommend you to refrain from purchasing HD for CD-ROM Emulator until
then.
3.      It will be relapsed around the end of July.

Keywords: Controller pad, CD-ROM Emulator, PlayStation Board




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/DECpc466
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About Malfunction of MOVCONV

Question:

I reported you that the file I sent to you the other day caused noise.
Particular noise seems to be put into certain vertical and horizontal
portions.Noise is inserted if the size is great. So, you may have verified it.The
problem is that colors of images displayed on the screen are different from
those of the original images when I regenerated a file converted using
MOVCONV utilizing the sample program.I found that dark yellow to brownish
images are regenerated as purple images. I am not certain what is wrong
because I cannot know the data structure. I want to send a file by mail, but I
cannot save it to a floppy disk because the original data are too great in
quantity. Data for Q-Time are small in quantity...

Requests:I am experimenting on conversion of various data. However, the
size of most data are not a multiple of 16. So, as you requested earlier, please
perform conversion according to a multiple of 1.Most of data currently not
supported are the following data related to sound:
CHANNELS                   MONO SAMPLE SIZE 8BIT FREQUENCY
         11.025kHz

I would be glad if those data were supported first if you do not mind.If data
whose quantity is 10 M-bytes in Q-Time are expanded to 100 M-bytes if they
are converted into 24-bit AVI file using VFW. I want to convert them at one
time, but it is practicably impossible. Please take some means.It takes one
minute per M-byte for MOVCONV to convert a file. If the file size is 100 M-
bytes, I will have to wait for 100 minutes. I hope you will consider increase of
speed.

Answers:

We are testing the test you sent to us. Please wait for some time.Concerning
failure in color conversion, will you please send us Q-Time data? If you did
not do something special in conversion from Q-Time, we will be able to
convert them.Our comments we can currently make on your requests are as
follows:
 - We are planning to install a function you advised on data whose length is
not a multiple of 16. (Time of installation: August or later)
- Concerning sound, a function for conversion from AVI with voice will be
added to the version to be released July 18th or August 1st.An AVI file having
a 44.1-kHz and 16-bit will be supported first.It will be converted into 37.8-kHz
pitch, and mixed with image track compressed to meet MDEC after ADPCM
encoding.No sound will be given off unless the function is loaded into CD-
ROM. Reproduction is impossible with DTL-H2000 and earlier.
- Currently, we have no plan concerning the quantity of data. We will review
this problem further.
- We are planning to increase conversion speed by and by.

Keywords: MovConv



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): TSUKUMO/TS-9900

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S590

Subject: About MIMEFILT.EXE

Question:

Is it possible to use MIMEFILT.EXE for data created using the "-quad" option
in DXF2RSD?I tried to create a finite difference file using those data, but finite
differences of normals were did not produced.

Answer:

You can use it for quadrangular polygons. I no ".nd" file was generated, make
sure that you selected "-n" option. No finite difference file for normals are
generated by default. If a .ndf file is generated, but it has no content (only 4-
byte header), there may be no difference in normal data. Check the number
of finite difference normals using "-v" option. The latest version of
mimefilt.exe is version 1.2. Please use it.

Keywords: mimefilt, dxf2rsd




Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): COMPAQ ProSignia 486/66-1050

Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Sprite Editor, etc.

Questions:

1. Is there any method which I can employ to display and synthesize multiple
TIM files for editing? If not, is there any alternative means?
2. Is there any method which I can employ to convert a TIM file into a PICT
file? If not, is there any alternative means?



Answers:

1. Currently, there is no method which allows you to synthesize multiple TIM
files for editing. An alternative means will be to convert multiple TIM files into
BMP format, and synthesize and edit them using any other appropriate paint
tool.
2. The file converter for WINDOWS to be released on August 1st will support
conversion from TIM to PICT.

Keywords: TIM, PICT

Host machine for development (maker/model No.): Maha posya
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510A

Subject: Output Data of Layout Tool

Questions:
I understand that Layout Tool acquires model data, arranges them visually,
and converts them to data format that can be handled by a program.
However, the document attached to Layout Tool (released on July 1st, 1994)
does not describe how data generated by Layout Tool are handled by a
program.When I lay out an object using Layout Tool, the following file group is
generated:
Hierarchy file (HRC)      Sequence file (ACT)
Light file (LHT) Camera file (CAM)        Model file (RSD)

They seem to be text files. Are they made into binary files by conversion to
allow a program to handle them? What data format is used then?All that I
know now is to use an RSD file.Please teach me the format of those output
data, and how to use them. I would be glad if you would kindly show me a
sample program using those data.

Answers:

As the on-line manual describes, access in a program is enabled if you
convert layout and animation data into TOD format. The TOD format is a
binary format which enables access to layout and animation data from a
program.TOD data can be generated by "export" on file menu of Layout Tool.
Otherwise, you can convert an HRC file into a TOD file using the converter
"mktod" which was relapsed in BBS earlier.The details of format and library
for access are described in the manual for the programming tool. The manual
for the format is as follows:
Animation File Format              (TOD Format)
Sony Computer Entertainment
March 6, 1994.
What Is an Animation File (TOD Format)

An animation file (TOD format) is used to set information on 3D objects
according to the elapse of time. It meets the expanded graphics library
"libgs". This file contains necessary data on 3D objects which are generated,
changed, and extinguished in each frame of a 3D animation (supposed to
consist of consecutive frames). In this file, data on each frame are arranged
according to the elapse of time.The details of the animation file (TOD format)
are discussed in the following:

2. Overview of Animation FileThere are 2-word (64-bit) file header at the start
of the animation file. The file header includes the following information:
- file ID (8 bits)L 0x50      An ID which indicates an animation file
- version (8 bits): 0x00, originally        Version of animation
- resolution (16 bits)Time during which one frame is displayed (Unit: Tick = 1/60
sec.)
- number of frames (32 bits)           Number of frames described on a fileFrame
data follow the file header. As described above, these frame data are
arranged according to the time series.

(See Fig. 1.)MSBLSBig.
32 bitresolutin
version
file ID
number of frames
Frame 1
Frame 2
Frame 3
Frame 4
Frame 5
file header
         Figure 1. Animation File Format


3.       FrameFigure 2 shows the composition of data arranged according to
the time series in each frame.There is a 2-word frame header at the start of
each frame. It contains the following information:

- frame size (16 bits)Size of frame data (including header) in words (4 bytes)

- number of packets (16 bits)Number of packets
- frame number (32 bits)Frame No.

Packets follow the frame header. Each packet consists of one-word packet
header followed by packet data. (See Figure 3.) There are various types of
packets. The size of data in each packet is not always the same whether or
not the type of the packet differs.
MSB LSB32 bit

number of packets
frame size
frame number
packet heade
rpacket data
packet header
packet data
frame header1
packet1
frame
Figure 2. Frame Format

Let us see the details of the data format for packets.

4.        PacketsEach packet is composed as shown in Figure 3.The header of
the packet includes the following information:
- packet type (4 bits)    Type of packet data
- flag (4 bits)           Meaning differs from one packet to another.
- packet length (8 bits) Packet length (including the header) in words (4 bytes)

- object ID (16 bits)      ID of the object in question

MSB LSB31 0
32 bit
packet length
packet type
object ID
packet data
packet header

Figure 3. Packet Format

An object means a 3D object (GsDOBJ structure) handled by libgs, in which
packet data are reflected. Packet length is described in words (4
bytes).Various types of data, such as the RST value of a GsCOORDINATE
structure, and TMD data ID, are described as packet data. "Packet type"
described in the packet header indicates the type of the packet.The meaning
of the flag described in the header differs with the packet type. The
composition of packet type differs with the packet type and flag.The packet
type is designated as follows:

- 0000 Attribute
- 0001 Coordinate (RST)
- 0010 TMD data ID
- 0011 Parent object ID
- 0100 Matrix value
- 0101 TMD data body
- 010 Light source
- 0111 Camera
- 1000 Object control
- 1000 - 1101: User defined
- 1110 Reserved
- 1111 Special command

The details of each packet type are described below:

4.1 Packet type: Attribute (0000)
If packet type is "Attribute", attribute for the GsDOBJ structure is set. In this
case, the flag is not used at all.

Composition of Packet Data for "Attribute"In case packet type is "Attribute",
packet data consist of two words. (See Figure 4.) The first word is a mask
that indicates the portions where values should and should not be changed.
"0" is set in the bit correspondent to the item to be changed, and "1" is set in
the bit correspondent to the item not to be changed. In the second word, new
data are put in bits correspondent tot he items to be changed, and "0" is set
in all the other bits. Notice that the default value to be set in the bits which
should not be changed is "1" for the first word, and "0" for the second
word.Each bit in the packet data in the second word shown in Figure 4 has
the following meanings:
Bit (0) - bit (2) Material attenuation
                   (0 - 3)           - 00     Material attenuation 0
                                     - 01     Material attenuation 1
                                     - 10     Material attenuation 2
                                     - 11     Material attenuation 3
Bit (3)            Lighting mode 1
                                     -0                Flag off
                                     -1                Flag on
Bit (4)            Lighting mode 2
                                     -0                Material on
                                     -1                Material off
Bit (5)            Lighting mode 3
                                     -0                Use lightning mode
                                     -1                Use default lightning mode
Bit (6)            Light source
                                     -0                Light source calculation off
                                     -1                Light source calculation forcibly
Bit (7)            Operation upon overflow
                                     -0                Z overflow clip
                                     -1                Z overflow not clip
Bit (8)            Back clip on/off
                                     -0                Back clip on
                                     -1                Back clip off
Bit (9) through bit (27)             Reserved (0: Initialized)
Bit (28) through bit (29)            Translucency rate
                                     - 00              50%
                                     - 01              100% added
                                     - 10              50% added
                                     - 01              25% added
Bit (30)                             Translucency
                                     -0                Off
                                     -1                On
Bit (31)                             Display           -0                  Displayed
                                                       -1                  Not displayed

For instance, light source calculation is forcibly turned on, packet data will be
as shown in Figure 5. "0" is put in the bit (6) in the first word to indicate that
changes are made concerning the light source, and "1" should be put in the
other bits to indicate that no changes should be made concerning the light
source. Therefore, the first word will be 0xffbf. "1" should be put in the bit (6)
in the second word to indicate that light source calculation should be forcibly
turned on, and the default value "0" should be put in the other bits to indicate
that the value should not be changed. Therefore, the second word will be
0x0040.

Packet Data with Light Source Calculation Forcibly On
4.2 Packet Type: Coordinate (RST)

(0001)In case packet type is "Coordinate (RST)", coordinates for the Gs DOBJ
structure are set. In this case, the flag has the following meaning:
 (See Figure 6.

translation         scaling rotation matrix type

Figure 6. Flag for Coordinate (RST)

- matrix type               Type of RST matrix
                            -0              Absolute value
                            -1        Finite difference matrix from the previous
frame
- rotation                  Rotation (R) flag
                            -0                 Not set
                            -1                 Set
- scaling                   Scaling (S) flag
                            -0                 Not set
                            -1                 Set
- translation               Parallel translation (T) Flag
                            -0                 Not set
                            -1                 Set

The composition of packet data varies with the values in the rotation, scaling,
and translation bits in the flag as shown in Figure 7. In the figure, Rx, Ry, and
Rz stand for the X-axis, Y-axis, and Z-axis components of the rotation angle,
respectively. Similarly, Sx, Xy, and Xz stand for the X-axis, Y-axis, and Z-axis
components of scaling, and Tx, Ty, and Tz stand for the x-axis, y-axis, and z-
axis components of parallel translation.


(a)         Flag: 1110 or 1111                         Rx                     Ry
                    Rz               Sy                Sx             ***
            Sz                       Tx                      Ty
            Tz


(b)         Flag: 0110 or 0111                         Rx                     Ry
                    Rz               Sy                Sx             ***
            Sz

(c)         Flag: 1010 or 1011                         Rx                     Ry
                    Rz                        Tx                      Ty
            Tz

(d)         Flag: 1100 or 1101                Sy             Sx               ***
            Sz                       Tx                      Ty
            Tz

(e)         Flag: 0010 or 0011                         Rx                     Ry
                    Rz

(f)         Flag: 0100 or 0101                Sy             Sx               ***
        Sz

(g)     Flag: 1000 or 1001                           Tx                         Ty
                Tz

Figure 7. Composition of Packet Data for Coordinate (RST)

Type 4.3 Packet Type: TMD Data ID (0010)

In case packet type is TMD data ID, the modeling data (TMD data) which
substantiate the object concerned are set. In this case, no flag is used.
Packet data should be t2o-=byte TMD data ID. (See Figure 8.)

        16 bits                    ***                                 TMD data ID

        Figure 8. Composition of Packet Data for TMD Data ID

4.4 Packet Type: Parent Object ID (0011)

In case packet type is parent object ID, the parent object for the designated
object is set. In this case, no flag is used. Packet data should be two-byte
parent object ID.
 (See Figure 9.)

                                                     16 bits                    ***
                          Parent object ID

Figure 9.         Composition of Packet data for Parent Object


4.5 Packet Type: Matrix Value (0100)

In case packet type is a matrix value, lsmatrix of the Gs DOBJ structure is set.
In this case, no flag is used.Packet data have the composition shown in Figure
10.

        R01                        R00               R10                        R02
        R11                        R11               R21                        R20
        ***                        R22                                 Tx
                  Ty                                 Tz

Figure 10. Composition of Packet Data for Matrix Value

4.6 Packet Type: TMD Data Body (0101)

Yet to be developed4.7 Packet Type: Light Source (0110)

In case packet type is light source, the light source is set.In this case, object
ID should be ID of the light source different from ID of an ordinary object. The
flag has the following meanings: (See Figure 11.)

***               color   direction                  data type

Figure 11. Flag for Light Source
- data type               Type of data
                          -0                         Absolute value
                          -1                           Finite difference from
previous frame
- direction               Direction flag
                          -0                         Off
                          -1                         On
- color                   Color flag
                          -0                         Off
                          -1                         On

The composition of packet data varies with the direction and color bits in the
flag as shown in Figure 12.
(a)      Flag: 0110 or 0111                        X110 r 01         B         G        R

(b)       Flag: 0100 or 0101                         X100                       Z
(c)       Flag: 0010 or 0011                **       B        G        R

Figure 12. Composition of Packet Data for Light Source

4.8 Packet Type: Camera (0111)

In case packet type is camera, data on visual point position are set. In this
case, object ID is camera ID different from an ordinary object ID.The flag has
the following meaning. (See Figure 13.)

Notice that meanings of other bits vary depending on the type bit.

(a)       Camera type: 0Z angle Position & reference data type camera type =
0
(b)       Camera type: 1 translation rotation data type camera type = 1
          Figure 13. Flag for Camera       1.       Camera type bit: 0                  -

data type                 Type of data
                          -0                Absolute value
                          -1                  Finite difference from the previous
frame
- position & reference Visual point and interest point position flag
- z angle            Interest point angle flag from horizonal plane
                           -0                         Off
                           -1                         On
2.        Camera type bit: 1                 - data type                 Type of data
                  -0                         Absolute value                        -1
            Finite difference from the previous frame                    - rotation
                  Rotation (R) flag
                           -0                         Off
                           -1                         On
                           - translation              Parallel translation (T) flag
                           -0                         Off
                           -1                         On

The composition of packet data varies with the flag as shown in Figures 14
and 15.
(a)     Flag: 1100 or 1110                                  Px
        Py                                 Pz                                   Rx
                        Ry                                  Rz
        Z

(b)     Flag: 0100 or 0110                                  Px
        Py                                 Pz                                   Rx
                        Ry                                  Rz

(c)     Flag: 1000 or 1010

Figure 14.    Composition of Packet Data for Camera (1)

(a)     Flag: 0111                                  Rx
        Ry                                 Rz                                   Tx
                          Ty                                Tz

(b)     Flag: 0011                                  Rx
        Ry                                          Rz

(c)     Flag: 0101                            Tx
        Ty                             Tz
Figure 15. Composition of Packet Data for Camera (2)

4.9 Packet Type: Object Control (1000)

In case packet type is object control, setting for control of object is
performed. In this case, there are no packet data. The flag has the following
meaning:
0000                       Create
0001                       Kill
0010 - 1111      Reserved

4.11 Packet Type: Special Command (1111)

In case packet type is special command, animation data are controlled.
Details are not yet determined.

Keywords: Layout Tool



Host machine for development (maker/model No.):
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H
Software tool model NO.: DTL-S

Subject: About Sound Development

Question 1:

Concerning AIFF2VAG, quality for particular sound (voice, flute, etc.)
extremely varies from a sampling frequency of 24K to a sampling frequency of
22K. Do you have any plan for improvement?
Question 2:

Will all the MIDI codes intended for SoundDelicatessen be supported in the
next version?

Question 3:

Is it become possible to confirm sound quality of CD-XA for MAC in future?

Question 4:

For CD emulation, use of hard disk produced by Sony is specified. We have to
make preparations for purchase about one month earlier because of
documents required for proceedings. We are planning to purchase DEC's
DSP3107LS as hard disk for CD emulation. Is there any problem?


Answer to Question 1:

We are improving the encoder engine currently.The conventional encoder is
weak in metallic sound. An improved encoder will be released.According to
our plan, it will be added to the next version to be released on August 16.
Thereafter, we will offer a plural number of encoder models.

Answer to Question 2:

NRPN (rewrite a table of VAB according to a MIDI message, etc) will be added
to the next "beta" version. All the others will be incorporated into the next
version.

Answer to Question 3:

It will not be possible for the time being.

Answer to Question 4:

CD-ROM emulation requires special specification. It will take time for us to
check and select models. Please wait for some time until we will announce
the models usable.Keywords: AIFF2VAG, SoundDelicatessen, CD-ROM
Emulator




Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S560

Subject: About CD ROM Emulator

Question 1:

Is it possible to connect two or more hard disks to the CD emulator (DTL-
S2020), and select one for emulation? Are HDs seen from DOS in this case?
        Please see the following example:
AT-----DTL-S2020------1GHD------1GHD-----1GHD

Question 2:

Generally, CD-ROM Drive (DTL-H2010) is connected to DTL-H2000. Is it
possible to reference it from DOS if it is connected to the SCSI board?



Answer to Question 1:

HD for CD-ROM Emulator is accessed from DOS using the function for CD-
ROM Emulator. That is, it is not seen as a drive for DOS.The daisychain of the
drive will be supported. Also, we will provide a function which will allow you
to divide one drive into partitions, and handle them as a plural number of CD-
ROMs.

Answer to Question 2:

Our answer is that it cannot be referenced because DTL-H2010 is not
equipped with SCSI interface.Keywords: CD-ROM Emulator




Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DOS/V (DELL 466/MXV)
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model N.: DTL-S210

Subject: Requests concerning Sprite Editor

Questions:

Currently, I am developing a map for a fighting game using 32-dot cells, but
triple scroll is too much for synchronization. If you will improve Sprite Editor, I
will be able to increase processing speed using a method I am thinking of. My
request is to expand the area where patterns can be placed in animation
mode of Sprite Editor from 192*192 to 1024*1024 or more. (It will be better if
the area can be set freely.) (In this case, offset coordinate values for ANM
data to be output will be expressed in words. It will be better to output a file
discriminated from the current output data.) Then, I will be able to constitute
a map in any desired unit without preparing a map using cells. This will
remove transparent cells generated when a multiplex scroll map is prepared
using cell maps, and I may only save a smaller number of primitives to OT.
(Currently, I use about 500 primitives, but several tens of primitives will suffice
for expression.) Thus, I will be able to reduce drawing speed.I ask you to
provide Sprite Editor with a function which allows designation of palettes to
cell and animation patterns in 16-color mode, although I do not do so
currently. Unless such a function is provided, there will be restrictions to
generation of a game in 16-color mode. (If possible, I would be able to draw a
ma; using 16 colors/cell. I am using 256-mode currently.)
Answers:

If you save cell and animation patterns for 16-color data while switching the
palettes, you will be able to designate different palettes to each cell and
sprite. In Ver. 1.4 to be released in August 2nd, you can switch palettes even
after saving of cells and sprites. (As you know, 16-color data assures higher
drawing speed than 256-color data.)Concerning transparent cells, you seem
to save them as primitives. You do no have to save transparent cells as
primitives. Because Map data are initialized using cell No. 0. Cell numbers in
portions where nothing is saved (transparent cells) are all 0. Drawing will be
much easier if you do not save primitives if cell numbers are
zeroes.Concerning your request to use 1024 or more as offset coordinates of
sprite patterns for animation, we will review your request but it will be difficult
to provide such a function soon because many changes are involved.

Keywords: Sprite Editor




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): Apple/Macintosh Quadra
840 AV
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H700
Software tool model No.: DTL-S710

Subject: About Compatibility of SoundDelicatessen/MIDI Driver

Question:

Now, Sound Delicatessen can be used with Apple MIDI Manager. Is it
possible to use it with OMS of OPCODE SYSTEMS. If possible, I want you to
provide such a function by all means.

Question:

We are now trying to develop a function which will assure use of
SoudnDelicatessen with OMS of OPCODE Systems and FreeMIDI of Mark of
the Unicorn.The time of release is not yet fixed.

Keywords: SoundDelicatessen



Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210

Subject: About Shading of Polygons with Textures

Question:

When I paste textures to some polygons constituting part of an object,
polygons to which textures are pasted look as if they were floated from other
portions. Suppose an eye is mapped on a red sphere. In this case, a TIM file
in which a black eye is drawn at the center of the same red color as is set on
the sphere is used. I select polygons where I want to put the eye using
Material Editor, maps textures, and performs smooth shading of the entirety.
Then, the portion where the textures are placed (which should be the same
color) is shaded in a manner different from other portions, and looks as if it
were floated.Does this difference in shading occur when the colors of
polygons are directly designated, and when the case colors are assigned
using textures?If so, can I use some suitable method to avoid this?

Answer:

In the programming tool DEX-2000 to be released around the end of August,
improvements will be made to reduce difference between texture and
polygon colors, but the difference will not be eliminated completely.There are
the following solutions to this problem:
1) Use double polygons where a texture is pasted (the portion of the black
eye), and paint the lower polygon in the same red like the surroundings.When
you paste a texture for a black eye to the upper polygon, make the
circumference (which you want to pain in red) of the black eye texture
transparent in black. Then, the red of the lower polygon will appear.For easy
operation, this function will be added to Material Editor. Currently, you can do
the same thing by creating double polygons having the same vertexes.

2) Turning off light source calculations for the entirety
If you turn off light source calculations, colors on textures will not be lost. An
object which rotates with respect to the light source may look unnatural
because the colors of polygons do not vary. In all the other cases, objects will
look natural even if light source calculations are turned off, and execution
speed will increase.In this case, however, it is necessary to set polygon
colors utilizing the results of light source calculations for polygons without
texture so that the object may be look solid. This can be done using "Drawing
color writing" function of Material Editor.

3) Pasting texture to the entire area
 If you paste a red texture to the white eye portion, to which no texture is
usually pasted, the boundary between textures will disappear. Because the
texture for the white eye is mono-color (red), a small texture (e.g. 4x4) may be
greatly expanded. In this case, execution speed will be reduced because the
area for texture mapping will increase.

Of those methods, (1) will be more practicable.

Keywords: Texture, polygon, shading




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): DEC/LP-486
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Polygons and Textures

Questions:
1) How to prepare a two-sided polygon
I hear that two-sided polygons can be used. What should I do to prepare such
things using the tool?Currently, I am preparing a similar thing using two
polygons, but I need too many polygons. I would like to use two-sided
polygons, please teach me what to do.

2) Change in texture pasting angle
Is it possible to change the texture pasting angle by 90 degrees with the
position and angle of the polygon itself unchanged?I want to rotate the same
picture without using different pictures.

Answers:

Because two-sided polygons are not supported by the library. So, you cannot
create data using the tool.If two-sided polygons are supported by the library:

1) The entire performance will be delayed because the number of decision
routines will increase.
2) Performance which reverses normal will be needed when two-sided
polygons are inverted.For these reasons, it is said that it is more efficient in
speed to have two polygons at the data side than to support them in the
library.Currently, you have to use a modeler to create two polygons. In
future, we will provide a function which will allow you to create two polygons
using Material Editor.

Keywords: Polygon, texture




Host machine for development (maker/model No.): Maha posya
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510A

Subject: About Compression of Image Data

Questions:

I want to generate a large quantity of movie data. It is expected to take
considerable time to compress image data using Movie Converter, which
utilizes software for compression. It takes about thirty minutes to generate
100 frames of data using the currently available movie converter.I want to
compress data using any other system. According to newspapers and
documents distributed in briefings last year, the compression method is
designated as JPEG. Does it comply with JPEG Standard?I am not familiar
with the details of algorithm. In magazines featuring articles on JPEG, I have
never seen the coding method VLC in the algorithm DCT+IQ+two-dimension
VLC described in the manual.Is the compression method for PlayStation
closed within PlayStation?

Answers:

Fundamentally, only "MPEG macro-block layer" level compression is
performed in PlayStation.The encode/decode in a MPEG macro-block consists
of:

DCT+IQ+Two-dimension VLC

It has the same composition as the one used with PlayStation.It differs from
the MPEG macro-block in the following points:

1) A MPEG macro-block performs VLC in the order of Y, Cb, and Cr.
PlayStation do so in the order of Cb, Cr, and Y.
2) A MPEG macro-block outputs the values of Y, Cb, and Cr. PlayStation
outputs them in RGB.The specification of the IQ table and VLC code book are
the same as MPEG.If you are going to use a commercially available encoder,
we recommend MPEG because it seems more suitable than JPEG.The
compression speed of MovConv version 1.5 has been almost doubled.

Although dependent on the contents, 320x320 data can be compressed at a
rate of less than six seconds per frame.

Keywords: Movie, MovConv




Host machine for development (NEWS/DOS): DECpc LPx 466d2
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H500
Software tool model No.: DTL-S510B

Subject: About Sprite Editor


Question:

I have a request and question about Sprite Editor.Request: I want to hold
information on "Entire TIM display x 2" in display scale factor setting.

Question: Why delicate dislocation (about 1 dot) is caused during animation.
(A phenomenon that the image is expanded horizontally by one or two dots
when a 64 x 64 dot animation is displayed)


Answer:

To enable, rotation, enlargement, and contraction, sprites are displayed by
mapping textures to quadrangular polygons for animation in Sprite Editor. In
PlayStation, one pixel at the right end and one pixel at the bottom end are not
displayed in quadrangular polygon drawing. For this reason, an additional
pixel is added to the texture for drawing with Sprite Editor. However, it is
impossible to designate an additional pixel to a texture that includes the right
end and bottom end of the texture page (TIM bank). Therefore, data which
include the right end and bottom end are expanded (the one line at the center
is expanded to two lines) by one pixel when they are displayed. Delicate
dislocation will be eliminated if you reduce the size by one pixel (reduce the
XY size of the animation window by one pixel) if the data includes one pixel at
the right end and one pixel at the bottom end.

Keywords: Sprite Editor




Host machine for development (maker/model No.):
Hardware tool model No.: DTL-H200
Software tool model No.: DTL-S210
Software tool model No.: DTL-S220

Subject: About Layout Tool

Question:

How should I use "Key Frame Recorder" described in the manual?In the beta
version, I did not find any operation panel. If such function cannot be used
with the beta version, when it will be possible to use it?

Answer:

On August 16th, we will release a new version including the function of linear
interpolation key frame animation.

Keywords: Layout Tool
